Telegraph (Brisbane, Qld. : 1872 - 1947), Wednesday 2 June 1926, page 9


Special Article.

ST. HELENA IN 1868.

Prison Regulations.

BY THOS. WELSBY

WRITTEN FOR "THE TELEGRAPH"

I am anxiously yet assuredly await-ing the day when ever-busy Mayor Jolly will accept, the offered
freedom of the Isle of St. Helena, and receive

that compact area of Nature's beauty spot as a recreation ground and plea-sure resort for the people and
children of sunny Queensland. The desire to free the island has been made by the Home Secretary, and the
Mayor, so I am informed, is willing to take over, on behalf of all citizens, thoe mainten-ance and control,
awaiting only a favourable opportunity when more leisure time will permit. Let me, however, assure rate
and other taxa-tion payers that the island need never be a source of expenditure loss, but that, with care
and judgment, it can be made revenue, profit producing almost from the very moment it comes under
municipal government.. I could write and say much in re-gard to this, and could tell interesting stories of
the little, yet extensive and beautiful island and its 528 acres at high water mark boundary, of which in
1914 and since but three acres were occupied by officers' quarters and only, 1 1/4 acres' used for prison
purposes. The time is neither ripe nor opportune, for I know Mr. Stopford is in possession of a far back
informative history of the place, which history, I trust, he will partially unveil when he and the Mayor.
stand together, with other citi-zens, on its soil on the epoch of its affranchisement. I may, then, be per-
mitted to refer to some conditions of its earlier government, awaiting the Home Secretary's better right
and privilege to speak with other and better detail at the function to take place in the very near future. On
July 22, 1868, T. M. Eden, 50th Regiment, commanding troops in Queensland, issued "orders for the non-
commissioned officer in command of the military guard station at H.M. penal establishment at St.
Helena," the original document bearing "Ap-proved, M. C. O'Connel." These rules, when taken full and
by, are almost akin to the tales of the convict sys-tem, but not quite. The non-commis-sioned officer in
charge was to attend to any instructions given by the superintendent so long as they did not interfere with
the command of the military. He had to attend to all postings of sentries, and to see that they were vigilant
in the performance of their duties, and had visit them frequently during the day, and not less than twice
during the night. The orders do not state the number of sol-diers to be employed on the island. No more
than two individuals of the guard - when off duty - were to be ab-sent from the immediate vicinity of the
military barracks, and above all, no soldier was to sleep anywhere but in these barracks. The officer in
charge of the guard had to see every sentry mounted on his duty with his rifle loaded, and with nine
rounds of ammunition ready. The sentries on Nos. 1, 2, and 3 posts also had to watch with fixed bayonets.
Before the prisoners were released from their cells in the morning, No. 3 post had its sentry, and one had
always to be there when the "all right" signal was hoisted at night. Soldiers were not allowed to convey
communications or parcels either to or from any of those employed on the island, whether officials or not;
even although they were required to do so by the superintendent or any other local authority, and if so
desired to do, they had to report to the com-manding officer who, in turn, had to make a written statement
to the com-manding officers of troops in Queens-land. Soldiers likewise had to make an immediate report
of any vessel or craft or any floating material in the neighbourhood of the island, and a sentry could only
leave his post for the purpose of preventing a prisoner's escape. Among other duties of marching prisoners
to work in gangs of two deep, he had to be careful that he gave the prisoners no chance of seizing his rifle,
and therefore, was re-quired to keep at a safe distance. A sentry was to allow no person to pass him after
dark without challenge, and was to make a prisoner of anyone not able to give a satisfactory account for
his presence there. There were many more rules or re-gulations, instructions, or orders, such that you may
care to name them, space not permitting me to quote them. They were truly harsh, and must have been

effective. Signals were to be hoisted whenever a boat, yacht, or vessel hove in sight near the island, a red
and white flag going aloft if assistance was wanted. In case of alarm the. whole de-tachment was to be
immediately under arms. Orders were issued for day posts and nlght posts, for both soldiers and sen-tries,
the front's and ends of prison buildings had to be watched at night time, fences were to be strictly guarded,
sentries were to see that no prisoner left the island by means of any boat, raft, buoy, or by swimming or
otherwise. Have I not written enough? These are a few of the prison regulations for soldiers on the island
in the year 1868, long after the convict days had ceased in Queensland in the year 1839. There is more
humanity in prison life control nowadays than in the dark times of the "Sirius" and "Supply," and in the
cruel days of Norfolk Island. St. Helena could, no doubt tell many a curious tale, but not like the tales of
1788 and onwards for many years. So let us hope that when the free flag is unfurled by Mayor Jolly no
north-east, or south-east, wind will sound and sing a threnody, but rather a song, one of satisfaction and
content.

