The Brisbane Courier 1874, September 14

http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article1388464



The Penal Establishment at St. Helena.



The commencement of another sugar-making

season took us to St. Helena. The island is

but three hours by steamer from Brisbane. A

passage is secured by permit obtainable at the

Colonial Secretary' s office, and is a privilege sel-

dom refused to visitors or those who have busi-

ness motives in visiting the island. We come

within the latter category; business and plea-

sure for the time is our motto while meditating

a trip to St. Helena, and realisation in this

case seldom falls short of anticipation. Even

in the prisoners, with the freedom of action and

the general sense of usefulness that surrounds

them, there's a feeling of relief in comparison

with general impressions regarding prison dis-

cipline and penal servitude.

The prisoners at present on the island number

ninety in all; the majority of them - as many as

can be spared - are engaged in the field cutting

cane, and in the boiling house converting the

cane juice into sugar. Others are engaged

driving cane waggons and carting water; some

half-dozen are building a school house; others

in the bake house, wash-house, blacksmith's shop,

and the many et ceteras that go to make up a

large establishment depending upon its own re-

sources for labor. Some twenty-five officers and

warders keep the establishment in order. The

whole are under the care of Mr. John McDonald,

who has superintended St. Helena since its first

occupation as a penal settlement.

All the land suitable for cultivation, some

seventy acres, is now under sugar cane. A por-

tion - perhaps a third - of this land is good;

the remainder agrees tolerably well with the re-

sult of Dr. Voelcker's estimate of the soil sent to

England for analysis. It is not rich in the ma-

terials necessary for profitable farming. It will

require manure in addition to the good treat-

ment it has along received in order to secure

fair returns of cane or corn, or any other crop.

During the cold, raw winter - now happily

coming to an end - St. Helena has suffered se-

verely from the cold winds. The island has been

stripped of timber; a few trees only of the dense

growth that formerly covered it are now

standing. They are close to the garden of the

Superintendent. A few mangrove bushes still

occupy a portion of the low wet land with which

the island is surrounded. The high and dry

land is covered with cane; and some seven or eight

acres of mulberry trees have been planted

on steep banks. This total clearing of the island

was adopted that there might be no cover for

prisoners who attempted to escape. So far, this

is an advantage; the warders can now see clear

over the whole place. But this free exposure is

bad for the cane. The winds come in unbroken

gusts upon it, and have during the past winter

converted fully one-half of the entire crop into

a tangled mass of damaged and broken cane. All

the varieties - Bourbon, Diard, Chigacca, Salan-

gore, and Guigham - have suffered from the

winds. The ribbon cane alone has withstood

the storms, and promises a fair return in sugar.

The works is now being pushed ahead to get off

the damaged cane before warm weather and con-

sequent fermentation attacks it.

Crushing was commenced about two months

since; but the density was then found to be

very low (between 4 and 5), so the works were

stopped. The density has now risen to 8 and

9. The liquor from the damaged cane is very

dirty, but with careful treatment it is yielding a

fine blight colored yellow sugar, at the rate of

about one ton per acre. As the cutting goes on,

the land is being sreplanted with ribbon cane.

We were sorry to see the megass used for firing.

The soil of St. Helena is poor in vegetable mat-

ter; it is a pity to burn the megass, although

wood is scarce. It must all be made up some

day by manuring.

The workin the boiling-house is done by

prisoners; only two warders being present. The

cutting, carting, &c., is also done by prisoners,

and with so little apparent supervision that the

men differed in no respect from ordinary field

hands. The whole process is educational and

reformatory in a high degree, and we are glad to

find from the records of the establishment that

the great majority of the men discharged from it go

into regular employment. Few of them return to

St. Helena. Since the formation of the settlement,

some 700 prisoners have been discharged. It is no

ordinary satisfaction to the country to know that

not three per cent. of these men have relapsed into

crime. This is highly creditable to the system

followed at St. Helena, which at once tends to

reform the men, and learn them a useful occu-

pation, at which they find employment as soon as

they leave the island. The reconvicted are of

the usual "prison bird" type, and, to a large

extent, have come to Queensland from the other

colonies

In reading the reports, and comparing them

with those of similar institutions in and out of

the colony, the conviction is forced upon us that

St. Helena is one of the most suitable establish-

ments in the colonies for the reception of pri-

soners, and their preparation for again becoming

useful members of society. At the present time the

number of prisoners is below the average; there is

work and accomodation for double the number

- a good omen in itself, but we are at a loss to

conceive why this should be the case while some

of the goals of the colony have more prisoners

than can be properly accommodated. These

men should be drafted to St. Helena, where the

opportunities for becoming useful and industrious

are greater than in any other prison in the

country.

