Queenslander (Brisbane, Qld. : 1866 - 1939), Saturday 9 November 1901, page 884


SKETCHER.

THE ISLE OF UNREST.I. H.M. PENAL ESTABLISHMENT, ST. HELENA.

By S. K.

Like the side of some mammoth battle-ship looms the island of St. Helena in the distance as we stand on
the deck of the Otter, and each swish of the propeller

brings it into greater prominence. Soon the battleship form fades away, and in its stead appears a strangely
picturesque islet. What a contrast is here—a low shore of rather forbidding aspect, and above this a cliff-
like rise, with a long building perched on its summit; then, just a little bit to one side a cluster of cornfield;
gloom and shadow on the one side, on the other a wavy mass of green, and round the whole the ocean,
fretting and bubbling in a line of snowy foam. Gloom and shadow—ay, and grandeur, for there is
something in that great sweep upwards towards the sky that is strangely fascinating to the spec-tator. Such
is our first glance at the island into whose secrets we are about to peep. Quietly round to the landing place
slips the Otter, with ever slackening speed till a last throb of the screw drives her along-side the wooden
wharf. Passing through a file of blue-capped warders we are greeted by a dignified, bearded gentleman in
mufti —Mr. Ryan, the superintendent of the prison. He takes us out to the kangaroo, a curious little car
running on rails, worked by four Kanakas in a manner al-most precisely similar to the railway tri-cycle,
and having seats on the back and front. The Kanakas bend backwards and forwards quickly like so many
automatons, and the car spins along the stone break water that leads out to the jetty, passing on the way a
beautifully finished tramcar designed by a warder and made with prison labour. As the speed increases,
the reason for the curious name given to our vehicle soon becomes manifest, for the "kangaroo" has in
truth, an alarming "hop." How-ever, everything has an end, and we ar-rive at last on the shore, breathless
and thankful. Embarking in an antiquated Waggonette, we rattle along a well laid out and broad-gravelled
road that leads up to the Stockade. On the left the ocean sweeps in semicircularly, on the right is a grassy
upland, and on the front is a gentle-man brimming over with fun and good na-ture. Are we really on the
grim prison isle that imagination has so often painted? We have scarcely asked ourselves the ques-tion
before the light is shut out by a lofty stockade, massively built, and beside this appears a sentry-box on
stilts, holding in-side a watchful warder, who stands close beside his loaded carbine. A little further on is a
heavy iron gate leading into the interior of the prison, with three warders looking through the bars. The
gate opens, and we pass through into Avernus. St. Helena is not by any means a modern prison, for
instead of being circular and all the passages leading to a common centre, it is oblong, and the different
ways con-verge only on the gate. Mr. Ryan hands us over for the present to the watchful care of the chief
warder, Mr. Bowden, a de-lightful personage in khaki, brisk and keen-witted, and, like the superintendent,
quite free from any overbearing or "little ty-rant" manner. "What would you like to see first —the cells or
the workshops? The workshops? Right, come along this way, please." A second iron gate folds back, and
we are ushered into a little courtyard, then turn to the right, and proceeding along a veranda, arrive at a big
building, to which the chief points meaningly. It is divided into two long rooms, separated by a wooden
partition. In the first room is a babel at conflicting sounds. There is the banging of hammers, the zir-r-r of
flying machinery, and the click of tools. On the left are bootmakers, and on the right saddlers,
brushmakers, and bookbinders. Rows of quiet men, in the regulation prison suits stamped with the broad
arrow, and numbered one, two, three, or four as the case may be, are busily engaged in sewing and cutting
leather, controlling machines, &c. Each has something to do, and a warder stands ready to admonish or
instruct. The official comes up and explains the modus operandi of what we see. "This la what we call a
pressing machine," he says, showing us a little metal stamper; " it makes an or-dinary flap of leather into
imitation pig-skin. You notice that the leather is placed on a copper plate with a raised surface, then the
top jaw comes down, and the leather is covered with tiny holes that make it look just like pigskin with the
bristles taken out." Humph! Extremely honest! Another instrument, euphonious-ly termed the "Devil," is
used for teasing out doe hair, to be used in stuffing saddles. The rough coarse hair is put in at one end,
number so-and-so turns a handle, and a ball of silky filaments comes out at the other. Close beside this are

the finished saddles, and they compare very favourably with the work of Brisbane saddlers. Turn-ing to
the bootmakers, we watch for a moment or two the ordered activity before us. Again machinery is very
much in evi-dence —namely, a "stamping" machine, which, operated by a treadle, brings a sharp-edged
cutter on to the leather placed upon it, and cuts out innumerable soles and heels, the size varying with the
dimensions of the cutter; and a pair of heavy rollers for hardening and levelling the leather re-quired for
the boots. Besides the trades already mentioned there are two or three others going on in the same room,
such as binding brushes, and making horse rugs and tents. It is a curious experi-ence, and not altogether a
plea-sant one, to stand for the first time among a score or so of imprisoned men, all armed with sharp-
edged tools and hammers. Thirty prisoners are em-ployed in room No. 1, and a score of these find
employment in the boot trade. The bookkeeper informs us that work begins at 7 o'clock in the morning,
and goes on till 11.30 a.m., when they "knock off" for dinner. At 1 p.m. they resume their la-bour, and
work on till tea time at 4.30 p.m. Tea lasts for an hour, and then they are taken to their sleeping
apartments, having done the eight hours manual labour re-quired. "Do you sell the boots, saddles, &c,?" is
the question that very naturally

suggests itself. "Oh, no; we supply all our own needs first, and then send the re-mainder up to the
Government Storekeeper. The saddles mostly go to the Mounted Police, the tents to the Defence Force,
and the brushes are used in the Government institutions." It is a pleasant change to move into room No. 2,
passing as one does from noise to almost absolute quiet, and we feel more at home in the tailoring
department, for only an expert can hope to thoroughly un-derstand the somewhat complex work of the
different machines used in the room we have just left behind us. In the cloth room thirty-one men are hard
at work con-verting snowy heaps of material into shirts, trousers, &c. At the end nearest to us nearly all
the men are coloured— Chinese, aboriginals, Kanakas, &c. "We make it a rule to keep all the blacks and
Chinamen together, if it is at all possible," says the tailoring expert, "for the whites do not like being
closely associated all day with men of an alien race." With this timely explanation we start off round the
benches, seeing first the novices at work making their own shirts and other gar-ments. Then come the
more learned mem-bers of the profession, who are sewing away at some rough tweed, making gar-ments
for the pensioners at Dunwich and Goodna, and like happy places. Alongside of these are men who have
thoroughly learned their trade, and are employed mak-ing greatcoats of blue venetian cloth for the warders
and police. Once a week each prisoner receives so much work, and he is held directly responsible for its
com-pletion within a specified time. "Do you notice these long white slips of cloth?" queries the warder.
"They are to be made into slippers for use in this room. The tailors take off their heavy boots when be-
ginning work of a morning, and put on these slippers. In connection with the three steps or grades in
clothes making which I have just shown you, the prisoners find it much easier to turn off a good pair of
trousers than a well-finished coat. You will be surprised to hear that we turn out about 2000 flannel shirts
every year." Flannel shirts are no doubt very interest-ing, but all our time is taken up watching a new
arrival from below—from the tin-shop, you understand, on the ground floor— a broad-shouldered
Hercules, carrying up hot irons, for cloth-pressing, by means of a hook fitted in where his hand ought to
be. Perhaps the chief warder noticed that flannel shirts did not seem attractive, for he suggested an
adjournment to the tin-shop below, and we followed on the heels of our friend with the hook. The tinshop
is long and most of the avail-able space is filled up with tanks, buckets, tins, &c, in and around which four
men are dodging with redhot irons, and formidable hammers. If the gentlemen employed here should
decide to "argue" with Mr. Rawlinson the instructor, they could do it so thoroughly that there wouldn't be
enough of him left to solder a bucket with. All the work looks very well; everything will bear inspection,
and we are unable to de-tect any flaws either in the workmanship or the quality. In one corner a smith is lit
up by the ruddy glare from a forge, and he looks very fearsome as he bends a dirt-grimed face over the
redhot coals. Next inspected are two labour-saving machines, one a curving machine for bending corru-
gated iron, and the other a guillotine for cutting up tin. Tank-making is a specality of the instructors, and
he points with par-donable pride to the various sorts, ranging in capacity from 100 to 1400 gallons, turned
out entirely by prison labour. A water-proof paint, made of pitch and red oxide does away with tha chance
of lead poison-ing. As a rule if prisoners on admission ask to be put to a particular trade, they are put to it,
providing their sentences and qualifications allow; otherwise they are placed where required. In fact so
cleverly do the prison authorities arrange matters that St. Helena is practically self-support-ing. Leaving
the "tinkers" behind, we wan-der through into an adjoining yard, and visit the premises occupied by the
black-smiths and carpenters. Mr. Smith, the gentleman in charge, is an old identity of the island, and

behind his long black beard he conceals a wonderful amount of fun. The workshop of the blacksmiths is
made of the island stone, quarried by prisoners. Among the many articles turned out by the two smiths are
horseshoes, farm imple-ments, police beds, and a sanitary-cart— truly a motley collection! The
carpenters, six in number, have a large and airy build-ing. A really capital tramcar, made from all sorts of
odds-and-ends is shown as a specimen of their handicraft. In the en-circling yard may be seen a coal shed,
and a place for storing up the carpenters' wood, also a long array of moleskins, blue jumpers, and such
like dainty garments, strung out on clothes' lines. So much for the workshops. The kitchen, situated near
one corner of the stockade, looks like an immense laundry with the thick clouds of steam rising from the
boilers placed at one end, and heated by a big fire. In one boiler is "hominy," or maizemeal, thick and
white, and very appetising—to those that like it. In an-other great steam can is meat, and a third holds a
plentiful supply of soup for the coming Wednesday. The ordinary prison daily ration consists of 20oz. of
bread, 16oz. of meat. 6oz. of maizemeal, 12oz. of vege-tables, 1/2oz. of rice or barley, 3oz. of sugar, and
1/2oz. each of salt, tea, and soap. In addition to this bill of fare soup is served out on Sundays and
Wednesdays. Food is issued in mess-tins that hold provisions for five or six men. Next to the kitchen is
the bakehouse, and the white-capped and clean-aproned baker in charge is liter-ally between two fires,
since he does his work sandwiched in between a pair of huge ovens. Here all the bread for the prison is
baked, and the tables are piled up with crisp brown loaves, that look very tempting to a hungry Pressman.
Outside is the wood house, up to which a trolly runs, in order to convey bread, wood, &c., to the various
prison yards. More interesting still is a tank with cleverly contrived pipes. Into this big re-ceptacle all the
waste water and rubbish is thrown, and bubbling along the sewage pipes, shoots out into the waves far
below. Right away from the odour of kitchen and sewage tank is the house reserved for meat curing.
Though small, the walls are snowy white, and the place reeks of cleanliness.

The ventilation is as nearly perfect as human skill can make it. A wall shute off the meat-curing estab-
lishment from the hospital enclosure; on the top of this wall we notice another sentry, armed like the first
one with rifle, bayonet, and revolver. He presses down a rod, and a gap appears in the solid partition in
front. Passing through, we examine with some amount of curiosity a kind of triangular roof appearing
above the ground. Mr. Bowden lifts off this covering, and we look down into a big underground tank,
dome-shaped, 22ft. in depth and 18ft. in diameter. A garden ablaze with colour, with lovely lily sprays,
and climbing roses, and a dozon other sorts of flowers, with the smell of the green fields still clinging
round it, stands out gem-like in the dark setting around. As we drift, rather than walk, through this fairy
bower towards the cottage in the background, our worthy guide informs us that we are now standing in the
hos-pital garden, on the way to the hospital. A prisoner stands at the door, and his hand rises mechanically
to the salute. At present the ward is empty, and the twelve beds are folded up neatly, waiting the "visitor"
that may be expected at any moment. Everything has a spick and span appearance, and the breeze blows
un-checked through the windows and out at the door. We are then shown an enamel-led iron bath set on
wheels, used t0 bathe sick prisoners in. Dr. Wray, the Government Medical Officer, comes down once a
week to visit the prisoners and see that everything is as it should be. He is usually accom-panied by the
visiting Justice, Mr. Yard-wyn, who hears any complaints the men may have to make. In Dr. Wray's
absence Mr. Henry, one of the warders, looks after the dispensing. This functionary is a born humorist,
and his plan of operations may be summarised as follows:— If a convict is sick, give him a dose of "white
mixture" —this is quite sure to keep him going. If the sick man happens to be a warder, give him two pills
of podophyllin; should he not feel better, give him another two. Un-fcrtunatoly, however, a warder is
mostly born without any sense of humour, and as four pills are nearly as bad as a dose of '"white mixture,"
Mr. Henry has to be an expert dodger. As it is, he looks somewhat scarred and "warder-beaten." "Come
along and see the cells and the prison-yards," says the chief warder; then wo plunge from the light into
semi-dark-ness, into the very heart of the prison. (To be continued.)

