Truth (Brisbane, Qld. : 1900 - 1954), Sunday 20 August 1905, page 2


ST. HELENA SCANDALS.

Tricks, Traffic, and Trade A clever, Cloacal Clique in Clover The Ways and Wiles of Warders

'Truth's" articles a month or so ago on St. Helena maladministration called forth a lengthy screed from one
who writes as one having authority on matters not touched by "Truth" previously, but owing to pressure
on our space we have been unable to give publicity to the matter. But

better late than never. He draws atten-tion more particularly to illicit trafficking in articles made by
prisoners out of Gov-ernment stores - trafficking in which the prisoners are assisted by the warders - also
to obscene conversations carried on with the connivance of, or winked at by, the warders, and the
initiation of youthful criminals into deeper degrees of vice by past ministers in the art. Very rightly he
claims that a convict establishment should partake of the NATURE OF A REFORMATORY, but so far
from this being the case at St. Helena, he alleges that from 6 p.m. to 11 and 12 midnight every night, those
who are unfortunate enough to be confined in the wards have no option but to listen to filthy discourses on
the most loathsome of prostitutes, the most depraved and pugilists, and the most incorrigible of criminals,
and even worse. The older criminals seem to seek to out-rival their compeers, and the warders give tacit
sanction, if not encouragement, to what goes on. As "Truth's" correspon-dent puts it, "it is HARD TO
BELIEVE that the warders can be so destitute of and inaccessible to morality as to listen to a herd of
sexual manias penned up in sties of vice and revelling in their revolting filth." This is pretty hot coffee,
but if the half of what our correspondent tells us is true, it is amply justified. In sup-port of what he
alleges, he mentions that some time ago a certain section of the warders represented to the Home Secre-
tary the internal rottenness of the institu-tion, and petitioned for the removal of those who by their apathy,
or worse, con-sented to such a state of things. If this is correct, what was the result of such a petition?
Why was it never made public, and what STEPS WERE TAKEN to remedy the abuses complained of?
Before leaving this particularly unsavory portion of "Truth's" correspondent's communication, it may be
as well to point out that far worse than mere filthy talk among the prisoners is said to happen. Definite
allegations are made as to hideous abominations committed in the stables and elsewhere. The names of
those concerned are given, and all is, or should be, open to the light of day if anyone cared to delve so far
into iniquity, and all is said to have been committed with the connivance, or at any rate the tacit sanction
of the warders. Is it a fact in the absence of the local dispenser (Mr. Henry), the Chief Warder is in charge
of the dispensary, and that he knows just as much of dis-pensing medicine AS A BULL KNOWS of
dispensing lacteal fluid when called upon to do so? Also, is it a fact that a Frenchman whose sentence was
nearly completed applied to the Chief Warder for treatment, and was told that he was sham-ming, and
ordered to return to duty, which he attempted to do, but fell down in a fit, was locked up in his cell, and
died before he could be carried to the hospital after his groans attracted attention, not from the Chief
Warder, but from others. Now, as to illicit trafficking - first of all with regard to letters from the convicts
to their friends. It is well known that such letters are not permitted to be writ-ten except by the authority
OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, and that then such letters are most care-fully censored. How is it, then,
that innumerable letters do find their way from convicts to their friends and to be the authori-ties? How is
it that convicts are con-stantly being tried for writing such letters? Is it a fact that the warders see to the
posting of them for a consideration? The actual consideration is openly mentioned -5s. in the pound for
money sent by the friends of the prisoners. Warders are openly stated to be "fences." Of one man in
particular it is said that he has been given letters ad-

dressed by prisoners to their friends, and that the money SENT IN REPLY he has stuck to, and only
disgorged when forced to do so; also that tobacco and other small luxuries sent for the use of the convicts,
and which he has been paid to deliver, he has converted to his own use. Again, the cooks are stated to
openly rob the invalids and hospital inmates of the comforts allowed them, and to sell them, producing
them if by chance their defalcations are discovered as proof that they are doing good work and saving the
Government stores for the Government. There was a prisoner in St. Helena who was employed as chief
cook. He robbed the invalids in the hospital of their food, and stole the prisoners' tea and sold it to th

warders. He also MIXED FLOUR WITH THE OATMEAL which the doctor had ordered for some of the
prisoners in the yards. One morning the prisoners complained to the chief war-der that flour was mixed
with their oat-meal. The chief warder immediately sent for the chief cook prisoner and told him

he had mixed flour with the prisoners' oatmeal. Of course the prisoner denied it, and told the chief warder
that he would prove that the oatmeal was not adulter-ated, by showing some raw oatmeal which was in the
kitchen. "All right," said the chief warder, "and then I will believe you." The prisoner then proceeded to
the kitchen and shortly afterwards returned with a bag half full of oatmeal. "Give it to me," said the chief
warder, and, continuing, "now I am certain that you mixed flour with the oatmeal, because you should not
have any oatmeal before the rations are issued for the day. The very fact of your having oatmeal before the
issue of the rations is proof positive that the prisoners did not receive for tea and breakfast what the doctor
had ordered them." The chief warder then passed a remark about the foolish way in which the prisoner re-
vealed his theft, but all the same the latter was not punished. A suite of furniture is said to have been made
by the prisoners for the island offi-cials from the Government stores, and A CONCRETE INSTANCE is
mentioned of one such case which was nearly discovered owing to the unexpected visit of the Home
Secretary, when- the goods were covered with bags of shavings and left in the carpenter's yard, with the
full connivance of the officials implicated. 'Truth's' correspondent pertinently asks how it is if no "crook"
work of this sort is carried on, that the prisoners are con-

stantly being punished for having tobacco in their possession. Where doesthe to-bacco come from? It is an
open secret that it comes from the warders, and can they afford to supply it except for a cer-tain quid pro
quo? full information is given as to the way in which, goods — BOOTS FOR INSTANCE— are made in
the shops and disposed of outside. When the warder-in-charge turns his back for a moment the different
parts are "shaken," then put together, and the 'finished articles concealed, afterwards to be deposited in the
scrap bucket until the warder "in the know'' has opportunity to remove and sell them. The reward to the
prisoners is tobacco or a percentage of the price obtained. Most of the crook work is done by a clique of
long sentence criminals, men who have done time in most of the jails of the States, and who are intimately
ac-quainted with ALL THE ROPES. Men who boast that there is no point with which they are
unacquainted, and who look on their juniors in vice as "mugs." The members of the clique are said to be
kept supplied by the warders and others in authority with milk and other luxuries which are concealed in
the convenient scrap buck mentioned above until they find their way to those for whom they are intended.
Some of the clique send their dinner meat regularly to the kitchen to be fried for their supper. Their
potatoes are baked for them, and their plates are half filled with gravy. I heard a prisoner ask a warder,
who is boss over the kitchen, could get his dinner meat fried for tea. The request was ignored. On another
occasion I heard the warder say that he would not allow any more dinner meat TO BE FRIED FOR TEA.
This amounted to an indirect refusal, be-cause the clique got theirs done every day. They had tobacco, and
could pay the prisoners in the kitchen. If you are not installed in their good graces, you cannot obtain the
tobacco to get these things done. If any man runs counter to this clique, his life is made a 'misery to him.
He is hounded down and maltreated, called vile names, and generally has his life made a misery to him,
his complaints being treated with contumely by those to whom he makes them, if, that is, he is ILL-
ADVISED ENOUGH to make any complaints. Another villainous habit prevalent in St. Helena is that of
members of the clique congregating in the closets and there settling the details of any particular vil-lainy
they may have in hand. Any of the younger hands initiates, so to speak, in vice who may put in an
appearance in these sties being looked upon as interlopers and very quickly being given to under-stand
that their room is wanted and not their company. There is a prisoner at the island who used to buy up all
the socks, braces, towels, etc., that he could. For a quarter stick of tobacco, the value of which is about
twopence, he used to purchase SOCKS WORTH A SHILLING a pair. For braces which cost 2s, 6d. he
would give three-quarters of a plug. A warder used to supply him with tobacco. He gave the things which
he had bought to the warder after he had removed the brands which are put on them when they arrive at
St. Helena. The warder allowed him a commission on all he bought. Our correspondent says he firmly
believes that the authorities knew that this most de-spicable form of collusion was being carried on,
because he had been assured that a prisoner had reported it. On one occasion a box was discovered on the
trolly, just ready to be popped aboard the steamer. Inquiries were made as to whom it be-longed, and no
answer forthcoming, it was confiscated and on being opened was found to contain boots, clothes,
saddlery, etc, all gaol products, and all stolen. This alone will give some faint notion of the extraordinary

laxity pervading the estab-lishment owing to the connivance between the warders and prisoners. Enough
has been said to give a fair idea of the pernicious, peculiar practices perpe-trated at St. Helena under the
present sys-tem. "Truth" recommends the matter to the earnest consideration of Home Secre-tary Peter
Airey when he can find time to make an enquiry into the abuses existing in the chief penal establishment
of Queens-land.

