Telegraph (Brisbane, Qld. : 1872 - 1947), Thursday 20 June 1912, page 2


/ Second Edition. TELEGRAPH OFFICE, 3 p.m.

REFORM, NOT REVENGE.

Time was, and that time is within the memory of many still amongst us, when prison methods were
cruelly revengeful, rather than sagaciously reformative. In

that bad old time, ominously was inscribed, if not in actual letters, at any rate in letters which the vivid
imagination could not fail to note, the dread exhortation. "Abandon hope all ye who enter here." Abandon
hope! The very suggestion is terrific in its ruthless cruelty. What, abandon the very last of the gifts of the
gods, as left in the bottom of Pan-dora's box! But those were the days when society had not realised its
duty towards the afflicted. Are offenders against the law, aye, even, those who are regarded as criminals,
not afflicted" Criminologists all agree that crime is a virulent species of disease, either heredi-tary or
contracted? When, then, any member of the community exhibits symp-toms of that disease, must he or
she not be treated as a patient, rather than as a dangerous beast? With the advance-ment of civilisation, all
those afflicted with criminal tendencies have been re-garded as wanting special reformative treatment
rather than revengeful retribu-tion. To this end, prison methods have been entirely reformed, and penal
codes have been modified, with a view to bring-ing back to the service of society those who are capable of
being brought back into that widespread and necessary ser-vice. Under these modifications, every first
offender, whose lapse has not been deliberate, or cunningly devised, obtains a chance to prove that he or
she is not a criminal in the full and awful sense of that fearful word. This amelioration of the law's
exactions has proved most efficacious. No longer are civilised communities under the terrible indictment
of being the manufacturers of criminality, because of their fearful codes of retributive punishment. Long
has it been admitted that when the fiscal policy of the country is financially penal on the people,
smuggling, and every other species of dishonesty become rampant. The great number of cases brought
before the courts in regard to evasion of customs and excise duty amply prove that proposition. Also when
the criminal code is cruel and san-guinary juries refuse to convict, and there-fore criminals are permitted
to escape the due punishment for their crimes, while petty offenders are encouraged by the sense of
immunity. It is most gratify-ing to note that the Government have taken special steps to do everything pos-
sible to convince accidental evil-doers and even criminals, that the purpose of the law is not revengeful
retribution, but, in every case open to such humane treat-ment ultimate and complete reform. As reported
by the "Telegraph" the Home Secretary, in conjunction with the Comp-troller-General of Prisons, has
effected some splendid reforms in our prison sys-tem, the good results of which already are making
themselves manifest. In fact the Home Secretary states that with re-gard to prison reform in connection
with St. Helena prison, his officers have in-formed him that the whole temper of the prisoners has
changed since the initiation of the new system. Great improvement in their conduct, and in the way in
which they were devoting themselves to their respective prison occupations has been noted and recorded.
This is the direction, running parallel with general education of the rising generation, from which alone
the true millennium may he expected.

