Queensland Times (Ipswich, Qld. : 1909 - 1954), Thursday 1 September 1921, page 5


PRISON CHANGES. FUTURE OF ST. HELENA. HOME SECRETARY'S VIEWS. An explanation of
the reasons BRISBANE, Tues. which actuated him in deciding to carry out the prison reforms, by which
St. Helena Island will be used largely for reformative purposes; the pri-soners reclasified, the Brisbane
gaol soners reclassified, the Brisbane gaol used to accommodate additional pri-soners, and a measure of
economy secured through reduction of staffs, and lessened upkeep, was made by the Home Secretary to-
day. Mr. M'Cormack said he considered it fatal to associate short sentence pri-soners, convicted of minor
offences, with the burglar and other professional criminals. Proper classification and separation would
avert to a great ex-tent, the dangers arising by allowing old hands to associate with the first offender.
When the scheme was brought into operation, St. Helena Penal Establish-ment would be mainly used as a
farm colony, and well-conducted, long-time prisoners would be sent there for special treatment during the
latter stages of their sentences. The rigours of prison discipline would he relaxed, and the prisoner would
learn to act for himself, and gain that confidence which would enable him to combat the temptations of
the outside world on his release. It was also intended to afford better facilities for the in-struction of
prisoners in useful trades. Prisoners who had been actively en-gaged in productive work were, on their
liberation, better fitted to earn an honest livelihood than those who had not been so engaged, and in point
of fact few returned to crime. A knowledge of a trade or some useful occupation was worth more to the
pri-soners than all the support and suc-cour of a benevolent society. It was intended, further, to make
better pro-vision against fire risk. The buildings at St. Helena were con-structed of wood, more or less,
decay-ed, in bad condition, and as they be-came older the risk of fire increased. The question of closing
St. Helena and removing the prisoners to a mainland prison had been raised. His own opinion was that it
should be closed and a suitable prison erected in a district where good agricultural land was available. But
that would cost a considerable amount of money and the present was not a time when such an expenditure
could be under-taken. The island was not the best place for a prison because it was a most costly place to
administer. St. Helena was a beautiful island, but it had hbeen made and kept beautiful by prison labour,
and he was afraid when it was created a recreation re-serve it would be no one's business to meet the
expenses of upkeep.

