Tamworth Daily Observer (NSW : 1910 - 1916), Saturday 4 April 1914, page 6


IDEAL ST. HELENA.

St. Helena has one more come into the limelight. The South Australian Comp-troller of Prisons, who has
been visiting Queensland, enthusiastically declared the island to be an ideal penal spot for the carrying on
of the modern reformatory methods associated with the treatment of prisoners, and a prisoner serving a
sent-ence of 5 years for stealing has escaped from the penitentiary by a simple but uni-que method. It was
at first authoritatively reported that he had constructed an ex-temporised boat by placing a bath tub from
the officers' quarters inside the four legs of a table turned upside down and paddled away to the mainland.
To have completed the picturesqueness of the incident, he should also have taken the tablecloth and used
it as a sail; but it now transpires that he did not make use of the table, bath or tablecloth, but of a couple of
forms which he made into a raft and was sighted with-in a few hundred yards of the island on Sunday
morning, two and a half days after he had first been missed. There is little doubt he was in hiding on the
island itself in the meantime. Not so many months ago a couple of prisoners were reported to have got
away from the penitentiary, but it was afterwards discovered that they had not only broken out but also
broken into the gaol enclosure and had secreted themselves in the ceiling of one of the workrooms. The
Moreton Bay League, which is opposed to St. Helena being giv-en over to the criminal class, has waxed
satirical in connection with recent happen-ings, having passed a resolution sympathis-ing with tho Home
Secretary in regard to the most recent escape "from the natural prison of St. Helena," and respectfully
suggesting before the foreshores of the mainland and adjacent islands are searched that "the ceilings of the
various buildings on the island be examined." One of the interesting features about the latest esca-pade is
the statement that the convict had only about a mile of deep water to nego-tiate and could then wade
through shallow water to the mainland. No doubt the es-capee will enthusiastically agree with the South
Australian and New South Wales Comptrollers of Prisons, as well as our own Home Secretary, that St.
Helena is an ideal spot for a prison, though the pub-lic, after last week's experience, are begin-ning to
have their doubts as to its ideality in this respect, and especially that section who have their homes on the
Bay within easy distance of the island, where the modern method of the regeneration of Bill Sykes and
Co.—which includes a good deal of freedom—is being initiated.

