Truth (Brisbane, Qld. : 1900 - 1954), Sunday 5 February 1911, page 10


DE PROFUNDIS.

AUT EX EXCELSIS. Penal Establishment or Health Resort ? High Life or Hell, Which?

(BY A PAYING GUEST.)

No. I.

Jut at the present juncture, the is-land of St. Helena, to which the paternal Government of Queensland
sends its long-sentence prisoners, is very much in the public eye. Many yachtsmen and men of the more or
less leisured class -

if therc be such a class outside the Tired Tim and mooch-about fraternity— would, metaphorically
speaking, move heaven and earth to have the prisoners shifted from St. Helena and to turn that admittedly
beautiful spot into sort of Coney Island pleasure ground. The ad-vocates of the change, no doubt, regard,
the proximity of the island to Brisbane as an important and (to them) a con-vincing argument in its favor.
It would certainly be far handier for camping purposes than Stradbroke Island, and now that Peel Island is
given over to the leper and drunks, the yachtsmen feel that something ought to be done. Someone ought to
go that their Satur-day to Monday outings on the Bay might be made more pleasurable.. And, as the
convict is tongue-tied and can't help himself, let him he the victim. On the other hand, the prisoners know
little or nothing probably of the agitation concerning them, and doubtless care less. Though I have some
strong opinions on the subject of St. Helena as a pleasure-resort or sanatorium, I shall reserve them until
such time as there seems to be a probability of the prisoners being removed. At present, I don't think
Messrs. Welsby, Love, and other river rovers have much chance of seeing their pet project carried out.
From time to time, globe-trotters of more or less dis-tinction, or some wandering Paul Pry of a parson,
have visited the penal estab-lishment, and at such times one invari-ably reads in the following day's
"Courier" some twaddle about an ideal prison, happy prisoners, splendid refor-mative methods, excellent
and humane treatment, courteous officials, and what-not in the way of fulsome eulogy. Visit-tors to St.
Helena are invariably shown over the prison and the grounds by Superintendent James Ryan, and when a
report appears in the press a blind man could tell that it is James Ryan who has indirectly written every
word of it. In-spired reports are the bane of many Government institutions besides the St. Helena prison.
For an instance, not long ago, a writer pointed out that there had never been any serious trouble with the
men in durance; that there had been no disturbances worth chronicling; and, in short, to read his report,
one would think that no serpent had ever entered the St. Helena paradise, and that peace and harmony had
always prevailed. Officials and old-timers know better than that. THE HOMINY RIOTS some years ago,
on account of blue-mouldy, uneatable meal being served out, were a very serious matter. The military had
to be called in, and loaded rifles were levelled at the men on strike through the long, perpendicular iron
bars which form the front enclosing barricades to the prisoners' yards. But, though the men were
undaunted, the order to fire was never given. Again says the writer, no tragedies have sig-nalised the
dealings of warder with pris-oner. This, too, is a deviation from fact. On one occasion, a man employed in
the bootshop was so incensed against a warder— this man is still in the service, and is a son of the
Superintendent of — Gaol— that he was determined to "do" for him. Thinking that it was his enemy
standing near to his working-stand, he turned savagely on him and drove a sharp knife right into the heart
of the WRONG MAN. Realising his mistake, he drew out the bloodstained knife and threw it at — who
stood near the entrance to the room, saying, "It was you, you - , I wanted." The warder fell dead, and his
assassin died before he could be made to pay the penalty of the law in the usual way at the end of a rope.
On another occasion, the blackfellow '"Al-bert," now under coercion treatment at Boggo-road, tried to get
to the same warder — with a tomahawk, and for this was ordered twenty-five lashes. Before they were all
administered — I think when he had got about thirteen — the doctor ordered the punishment to be
discontinued. On that occasion, I re-member the flagellutor expressed a de-

sire to be shown through the prison, but the superintendent earned the gratitude, of the prisoners by very

curtly telling him to get back on to the Otter and stay there. It may be that he exer-cised a wise discretion
in this matter also, for the sight of the "flogger" pass-ing among men who care very little for human life
and value their own less than that of others, is not calculated to please desperate and angry lawbreakers, to
whom death appears rather as the.por-tal of freedom than the messenger of extinction. Another mistake
which writers make is that no attempts have been made to get away from St. Helena. During the brief
period I spent there, two men tried to get away and failed. A gang of men were working in the quarry at
the western end of the island, behind the superintendent's house. War-der Rhodes, in charge, was on the
ground. A number of men were on top engaged in cutting out shelves. It was midwinter; rain and mist
obscured the atmosphere, and a semi-darkness set in about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. Two young fellows,
each serving a three-years term, slipped away from the top unseen by the warder, and hiding in the
mangrove swamp, were not missed until, about ten minutes to 5, when the gang mustered for return to the
stockade. Then a dirty nigger, one Johnny Nor-man, an old-time police tracker doing life for shooting on
the white police dur-ing a fracas with the natives, volun-teered to track the fugitives, and his services were
availed of. The younger of the two gaol-breakers was found in the mud, wet and hungry, about 7 o'clock,
and created a good deal of amusement, on being returned to the stockade, by demanding, "Where's MY
HOMINY?" The other, a more experienced bushman, was at large until nearly midnight. He got into the
water, and remained con-cealed there, his head hidden by the overhanging branches of a mangrove tree,
until he thought he mightly safely

venture forth. His plan was to get one of the horses, and by its aid swim the shark-infested channel to the
mainland. The plan miscarried, owing to all the horses having been stabled, as soon as the alarm was
given. As he approached the stable-door, he found himself look-, ing down the barrel of a rifle steadily
poised in the hands of a warder. The game was up, and he submitted quietly to recapture. Both men were
punished by the loss of five months out of the six of remission that good conduct might have earned for
them. Let me now return to my own experience as a prisoner. My term was six months. The present
Visiting Justice, ex-explorer J. G. Macdonald gave it to me, and I have had no regard for his mental equip-
ment ever since. Be that as it may, the Boggo-road tenement was overcrowded at the time, and though it is
unusual to send anyone serving less than a year to St. Helena I received marching orders. An examination,
more or less cursorv, by the doctor, always precedes removal from Brisbane and the vicinity of the
hospital, but prisoners are so anxious to get sent to the "Rock" that they often conceal afflictions to
prevent further de-tention in Boggo-road. Better food, more liberty, and, on the .whole, a far more manly
set of men are to be found in the long-time prison. All the "worbs" and "wasters" of the city are perpetu-
ally in and out of the local "boob," andi to live amongst them even for a very short time is a trying
experience that gets very much on the nerves. When the morning for departure come, the little escort is
lined up in its drab prison garb and handcuffed in twos on to a long chain such as serves to keep a team of
bullocks together. In "Black Maria" they are conveyed to the Otter, and until they arrive at the St. Helena
wharf are objects of callous curiosity, cruel criticism, and malevolent scorn on the part of the virtuous
passengers whose sins have not yet found them out. Oh, the misery of that trip to a sensi-tive, heartsore
prisoner! I know that if I could have shed my manacles and jumped overboard, letting the waters of
oblivion roll over me, I would gladly have exchanged such a heaven for the HELL THAT I ENDURED.
Some of my companions took it all as a matter of course, brazenly "cadged" cigarettes and "chews" when
the warders' backs were turned, and spoke in terms of such glow-ing enthusiasm of the pound of steak and
quart of tea they were to get on arrival as one would expect to animate the breast of a Fijian cannibal
invited to a feast of fat missionary. As none of the escort was looked upon as a really dangerous man, and
as our par-ticular warder in charge was something of a human being, as well as a "screw," he acceded to
my request to remove our manacles after we bad rounded the Pile. Light and headed for our insular desti-
nation. Now from time to time, men have been discharged from St. Helena who, though they might not be
able to write, could be sufficiently articulate on the subject of a personal grievance. "Truth" has been the
receptacle for many a 'de profundis' wail. Many a cry, too, of the dog-in-the-manger variety has come
from men who, either because they were "narks" or had an unhappy faculty for getting themselves
disliked, had passed a time of extreme misery which was intensified in their jealous souls by the sight of
other men with more "nous" getting through in comfort and something like luxury. Whether the cries are
all out of the depths, or whether some might not be regarded as paeans from Paradise, I shall endeavor to
show calmly and dis-passionately in my next article on the subject. I am afraid it will be my duty to
explode some fallacies on the sub-ject of the reformative character of the St. Helena prison, and I shall

join with others who have gone before in indicat-ing abuses that might very easily be remedied.

