Truth (Brisbane, Qld. : 1900 - 1954), Sunday 8 September 1912, page 10


Tyrants of St Helena

Some Facts & Reflections About Queensland's Inferno

Which Cant Describes as a Reformative Institution !

(By Proscriptus.)

"Queensland's Inferno" may sound "strong," but the feature of this ex-posure will be solid facts and sober
ar-gument. It is not the usual growl about the food—not the weak abuse of some-one who has discovered
a few warders

or officials who have, like everyone else, made mistakes, but a revelation of facts which defy
contradiction, or eyen modi-fication — facts which should make de-cent citizens indignant, and everyone
who boasts of this as a Christian com-munity feel ashamed.

When the reader saw the word "Tyrants" in the head-lines, he probably had visions of scenes so ably
described in "The Term of His Natural Life," and so weakly aped by dozens of writers since, who had
some little personal ven-detta to execute. But although the superintendent, Mr. James Ryan, was
exceptionally severe on the writer, and kept him at work he knew he heartily detested, and refused to give
him hard, active work, only a small-minded bitter-ness could make anyone blind to the strict sense of duty
which distinguished the actions of that responsible official. Never was there a gaol official more con-
scientious, and no reasonable man would accuse him of wilful injustice. And the warders? Yes; more than
one has done the writer a wrong. But the worst one of the three who did is only worth for-getting. And
during the whole time, the writer never saw a deliberate, studied act of spiteful tyranny on the part of any
official who is employed at the es-tablishment. Unfortunately for the prestige of the medical profession,
writer conscientiously can set down no. word of approval in connection with Dr. Dods, so will make no
comment. Who, then, are the "tyrants"? Who are those who know neither decency nor humanity? My
reply is, "Some of the prisoners themselves." The "heads" -the "professors of the University of Crime" -
the distinguished members of THE CLEVER BRIGADE. And while it must be clearly under-stood that
there is sufficient "oversee-ing" (a warder continually in sight) to limit their corruption to vile conversa-
tion, and the almost continual glorifica-tion of law-breaking of every kind, the conditions make it a
million to one against any young prisoner coming out of St. Helena with the little good he might have
possessed when he entered the establishment. The rule of the Clever Brigade (which is asserted by acts of
tyranny whenever a warder's eye is off, and verbal torment nearly al-ways) and their instructions
constitute a scandal of such atrocity that it could hardly be exaggerated. No romancer could conceive the
devilish thoroughness with which this organisation does its work of verbal corruption — and no fic-tion
could libel it. The cowardice and meanness of its pugilisfic and back-striking tyranny is past defamation.
A young man no sooner enters the gaol than he is in its clutches. And if he is not prepared to renounce
every better instinct he may possess and bow his neck to the "tyrants" - if, although he has tripped and
fallen, he hesitates to descend to the lowest level and wallow in their mire - he is subjected to treat-ment
which must sooner or later ex-terminate every decent impulse. Should he dare to appeal to the
superintendent, that official will punish any pugilistic tyrant if proof is given of a breach of the rules. But
these wily "professors" are too artful to be caught at their worst acts of verbal corruption, and the novice is
immediately branded as a "policeman" for reporting an offence, and soon learns something-of the snake-
like methods by which this league of in-carnated devils carry out their system of retribution. If Home
Secretary Appel were fool-hardy enough to state that the victim-ised prisoner's haye their remedy — that
they should report such hings to the superintendent — writer will meet it with detailed illustrations of the
hollow absurdity of such an answer. For the present I will declare that the alleged "remedy" which the
"first timer" is pro-vlded with is a flimsy mockery, and a standing reproach to "law and order." Because
the tyranny of the "Clever Bri-gade" is founded on a low cunning and cowardice which effectually shields
it from detection — because its methods are invested with PERVERTED CLEVERNE5S — its veiled and

diplomatic anarchy is none the less atrocious. "But" (one can hear an elector pro-testing) "1 thought that
all enlightened communities protected, the 'first timer' from the influence of hardened crimi-nals." Then
such an elector — especially a supporter of this most virtuous Gov-ernment — may as well understand
that Queensland must be excluded from that class of communities, and. that his pretty conceit is merely a
vain delusion. That some pretence at separation is made I will admit. But that it is any-thing more than
expensive farce, and a useless absurdity, I emphatically deny. And when I say that the boasted separa-tion
of prisoners at St. Helena is an impu-dent imposition upon the public who pay for everything, I challenge
Mr. Appel (the Home Secretary, who is responsible for the administration of that Department) to
contradict the statement. Besides the fact that the men work all day together, there is this awkward matter
to he explained away: When a young man, who is a "first timer," reaches St. Helena, he is put into "D
yard" until he has completed a stated por-tion of his sentence. During that period he spends his nights
locked in a cell, and the days (with the exception of the eight hours he may be working) in the company of
every class in the gaol, for the men with any number of con-victions stay in the same yard. If the "first
timer" reaches St. Helena a day, a week, or a fortnight after conviction, he remains with this select
company of "professors" for the remainder of his "probation.". And after the "Clever Bri-gade" have thus
had time to lay the foundation of his education' he is put in "A" or "F" yards, and the farce of "separation"
is continued . WITH VARIATIONS. Writer saw this in detail through being placed in the shops, although
he

tried very hard to induce the superin-tendent to give him hard, outside work. When at liberty there was no
work that writer despised more than needle work, and he never dreamt that he would ever live to wear a
thimble. The writer tried very persistently to induce the superintendent to give him outside work —
hoeing, digging potatoes, wood cutting, etc.— but, with the exception of less than a week of coal-
lumping, he spent the whole of his time on the tailors' bench, doing work that was not exercise. But,
although writer's applica-

tion for billet (which became vacant through the discharge of a prisoner) were never granted the
consideration which his capacity to fill them seemed to warrant, writer is quite satisfied that the
superintendent had some good and sufficient reason for his constant re-fusals. And, as a prisoner, if he had
to make up his mind to do work that was ever his pet ayersion, it gave him an opportunity of studying the
workings of a system which hypocrisy lauds as a reformative one. The second man from the writer was a
"first timer," who is doing a short sentence for manslaughter. It seems that a hulking bully attacked him,
and in defending himself (instead of running away as the law requires under such circumstances when it is
safe to do so) he struck his assailant a fatal blow. Now this young prisoner was not of the larrikin class,
and writer found him very apt to recognise good advice, and he showed no small degree of will-power in
keeping to a course when once convinced of it wisdom. Yet this Christian State, with a mediaeval convict
system, forces him to sit all day next to one who (ac-cording to his own tales of adventures) had tied bank
officials and police all up in knots, and was doing a long term for WRITING BAD CHEQUES, "leaving
his visiting card with the mug," as he expressed it. But although his very cleverness in certain directions
was in itself a danger to young pris-oners, it must be admitted that he was not one of the filthy-minded
"tyrants." In fact, writer must even go so far as to acknowledge that he has heard him educating this "first
timer" (who cannot read) in a right direction). But that does not detract from the indictment. The fact
remains that he is an old and clever offender, and while he has much —very much— that makes one sad
to think that a man of education and abil-ity could so turn his talents from their fair use - the total sum of
his influence is dangerous. Possibly, it was through havin, such an one for hi guide, com-panion, and
bench mate during bis first imprisonment that has made him a thorn in Society's flesh ever since. Any-
how, this "knight of the visiting cards" is between TWO "FIRST TIMERS," and both these men, and
others like them, have enough good left in them to make its cultivation sound business in the eyes of an
enlightened Government, and a positive duty to one with but a smattering of Christian sentiment. For the
very fact that they are easily led makes them the natural prey of the professional crook, into whose
company our "reformatory" system forces him. It is quite useless for Mr.. Home Secre-tary Appel to
endeavor to pass the blame for this on to the warder when they are at the extreme ends of the shop, and
there is such a clatter of boot-makers, tinsmiths, and other tradesmen's tools, that men can sing foul
parodies without being heard. Whenever the chief trade instructor, Mr. Davis, has heard wrong "language"
(the Clever Brigade are too experienced to let him hear the utterly foul expressions) he has always taken

action. But it is impos-sible for him to prevent what he cannot hear, and what no sane prisoner would take
the tremendous risk of reporting. The State owes more to Mr. Davis than it will ever realise, and it is
fortu-nate, indeed, to have such an officer; for the problem of maintaining discipline among the largest
body of prisoners at any one class of work, and securing in-dustry and obedience with so very little
punishment, requires an amount of wis-dom and tact as rare as it is valuable. Even the tyrants of St.
Helena — the Clever Brigade who have, with Tam-many thoroughness, subjected the better class of
prisoners to their rule regard-ing certain things, such as reporting or bearing voluntary witness of any
kind-even these recognise his authority with-out that questioning attitude they show to some warders, who
cannot appear commanding without an unfortunate STYLE OF SPEAKING. Absolutely impartial,
scrupulously just — with dignified courtesy even to a blackfellow or an Asiatic — he rules the shop with
a minimum of "locking up" and "half rations.'" To other warders he is an example, and to prisoners he is a
constant inspiration. But not even this officer, with all his experience, could always fathom the low
cunning and black devilry of the Clever Brigade, who sway the moral, or rather the immoral, influences of
St. Helena. And this inferno — which, according .to the gaudy cant of men in high places, is a reformative
institution — is literally infested with corruption. Any redeem-ing features to be found in it are due to the
officers — from the Comptroller down to the youngest warders.Mr. Penne-father is rich in experience, and
is mak-ing the best of the work which the wretched tools provided by the Govern-ment will allow. That
St. Helena is a breeding place for crime — a University, of Vice — is not his fault; he cannot alter an Act
of Parliament. Neither is it fair to blame the superintendent, who also is doing his best with the bad tool
pro-vided. And the chief warder, who has grown old in the service, is a strange contrast — with his
fatherly discipline and kindly disposition - to the bogey warder of popular imagination. No! There is only
one on whom the shame of it can be fairly affixed, and that is the responsible Minister who con-trols the
department, and who could have altered this long ago. And now that I have declared the separation of
prisoners in Queensland to be an absurd

and expensive farce, I am prepared to back up all I have said — and much more — on my oath. But if I
know aught of the ways of certain politicians, the Home Secretary will find some kind of lame
explanation; but, a surely as the charge I have made are genuine and unwxaggerated, he cannot hide this
shocking state of affairs by covering it up. I is too rotten! And if the public who plume themselves upon
their en-lightenment and Christianity permit it to pass, then the sooner they tear "For God and the Right?
out and put "For the Devil and the Tired Feeling" in its place the better.

There is no door closed to the woman of to-day. The latest field to be in-vaded is the racecourse, a young
girl in Buda Pesh having recently been gran-ted a jockey's license. Anyone with half an eye could see that
the time was coming when women would take the reins in her own hands. * * * Should oiiy dimculty' U
Oxporienoed «> lKocuring tliii paper regularly froin fheWBEts' a .,H2st5?r<l addr««<l (to the Manager,
"Truth," 215.217.A4e. laide-atreet, Brisbane, wilt receive prompt attention. ' ,

