Tamworth Daily Observer (NSW : 1910 - 1916), Saturday 16 December 1911, page 6


BRISBANE NOTES.

Correspondent

ST. HELENA.

St. Helena is still holding its place in the limelight. No sooner were the two in-quiries into the escape of
the convicts from the penitentiary concluded than an-other inquiry became necessary in connec-tion with
the suicide of a trade instructor. There was, it transpires, some connection between the escape and the
tragedy in so far as the whisky which the convict Craig had in his possession in the gaol hospital, and
gave to two of the inmates who slept while the escape was being executed, was innocently supplied in a
spirit of mistaken kindness, by the unfortunate man who afterwards took his own life. Since then

the convicts have been tried in accordance with the prison regulations, for breaking gaol, but no
information as to the punish-ment meted out has so far been allowed to transpire. During the middle of the
week the island was the centre of still another somewhat sensational incident. A constable and sergeant of
the water police and a civilian who had given evidence at one of the inquiries, and in the afternoon, after
the inquiry was over, had tea with one of the prison officials, were subse-quently, when making their way
across the grounds, placed under lock and key in the armoury—a big cage constructed of iron bars—until
such time as they were escort-ed by a warder to the point of disembark-ation. The three visitors, who were
sub-jected to what they consider an unneces-sary indignity and a needles display of authority, are very
wrath, and it is said that the last has not been heard of the matter. In addition to the authenticated reports
of the remarkable incidents which have been occurring on the island recently,

there are many peculiar rumors rampant as to the administration of the penal estab-lishment generally—so
much so, in fact, that it would not be surprising to hear of the appointment of a Royal Commission to
make thorough investigation. At any rate, until some such action is taken, the feeling of suspicion and
doubt which has been aroused is not likely to subside.

