Truth (Brisbane, Qld. : 1900 - 1954), Sunday 23 April 1905, page 2


ST. HELENA: -GAOL GRIEVANCES.

A CONVICT'S CHRONICLES.

No I.

How many of those who go down to the Bay to take their pleasures ever think as they pass the pretty
island of. St. Helena of those confined in this the chief penal estab-lishment of Queensland— of the
dreary monotony of their daily existence, of the hearts fretting for liberty, of the characters : slowly but
surely deteriorating in the diseased

moral atmosphere in which they have for a time to mature? Here is the daily round on the island for the
170 or more prisoners confined there. At this time of year all rise at the sound of a bell at 6 a m. except the
dairymen, cooks, and some few others who have to rise much earlier. The 24 hours of the day are
apportioned as follows: 8 hours work, 13½ hours in cells or wards, and 2½ hours in the yards. AFTER
THE BELL RINGS, five minutes are allowed within which ham-mocks must be rolled up and the night-
buckets brought out and emptied into a hole in the yard, which hole is flushed with water through a drain
into the sea and scrubbed , daily by the black convicts, who live in that particular yard. At the present time
there are four blacks confined there and one white man, a lamp-trimmer. It may be interesting to know
that these men have their food in this yard, and the blacks make a bath of the hole. Each man as he
empties his bucket into the hole has to salute the warder, and the idea of a man with a hammock over his
shoulder and a night-bucket in his hand saluting a warder is worthy of— well, St. Helena. Breakfast

CONSISTS OF HOMINY . which is brought into the yards in "kits" (tin dishes 4 inches deep and about
14 inches in diameter.) Each kit contains the portions of five or six men who mess to gether, and five or
six kits are brought into each yard. Hominy is described as simply vile and is never touched by men on in-
dulgence allowance, (sugar and full ration of bread) unless it is to spread on some bread saved from
dinner the day before. Indulgence allowance is only granted after the probationary period is over, and this
probationary period depends on previous convictions. If there are two previous con-victions the period is
six months, if three, nine months and so on. Tea and sugar are served out with full indulgence allowance.
Work commences about 7 a.m. Some go to their trades — saddlery, boot making, tailoring and so on,
while the others go TO OUTSIDE WORK,

odd jobs about the island, chipping in the fields, cart driving, and so on. All are clad in the one garb—
moleskins, cabbage-tree hat, underflannel, and twill cotton over shirt. One change of these clothes is
allowed per week, except to men in billets who never get any dirty work to do— they get two changes.
Every suit is branded with the wearer's number and "St. Helena Penal Establishment." If by chance a man
gets his clothes worn or torn, he goes to the store and: gets what is known as a suit of "duck egg"clothes to
wear while his own are being washed or repaired. These "duck eggs" are suits which have been
condemned. They are all branded with the broad arrow. As the men go out to work they have to SALUTE
THE WARDER at the gate— St. Helena is all salutation. The dinner bell rings at 11.50 - ¾lb. of meat,
about the same of bread, and 1/2lb. of sweet potatoes, which are always stringy and generally more wood
than potato. After dinner, the kits, knives, forks, and so on, have to be washed up and put in the
indulgence box. Then the billeted men are called out, and quarter of an hour afterwards, the general and
gangmen go to work, saluting the warder at the gate as they pass out. At 3.40, a flag goes up to recall the
outside workers into the stockade. Five minutes afterwards a bell is rung, and the men are counted in by
the warders, each man saluting the chief warder or the comp-troller. Anyone not in when the bell rings or
who fails to salute is liable to punish-ment. Supper consists of HOMINY AND WATER, except tor the
indulgence men who also have tea and sugar. Then, after washing-up, three-quarters of an hour's
recreation (save the mark) in the yards is allowed. After which, the bell rings for roll-call. The men

are ranked up in silence, answer their names, and salute the warder. They are then searched before the

superintendent, and must not forget to salute, after which they go to their wards or cells, are locked up,
sing out, "Right, sir," salute again, and have to keep silence until the superintendent goes his round with
the chief warder on duty for the "dog watch," who presently sings out "Right, men," when talking is
allowed for one hour. Then "Silence" is ordered, after which any talking or noise up to the time of the
morning bell is punish-able. The hour's talk is a privilege VERY HIGHLY ESTEEMED, but it means
more to men in the wards than to those in the cells. The former can have free communication with their
fellow unfor-tunates, the latter can only talk through the walls of their cells. Some cells are 4ft. x 9ft.,
others 5ft. x 9ft., and the furniture con-sists of a hammock, bedding, and a night-bucket. A pint of water is
also supplied. The bedding consists of three half-blankets. Except in the observation cells, once locked up,
a man is entirely private and cannot be spied on from the outside. Cells and wards are arranged on either
side of a brightly-lit passage, along which the warders patrol at night. In each ward are twelve men, six on
each side, three above and three below, a narrow passage running up the centre, and an oil drum for a
night-bucket stands at the head of the passage. The hammocks are slung from the walls and TWO IRON
BARS. These bars form the passageway. The oil

drum is the only convenience the men have and it can be imagined what a fearful stench those whose
hammocks are over or near this bucket have to endure all night. While on this repulsive subject, it may be
as well to mention that the emptying of the bucket is a fruitful source of complaint. The men arrange
among themselves who shall do so and constantly complaints are being made to the Superintendent about
the matter. Prisoners are allowed books, and those in cells can read as long as the day-light lasts. Those in
the wards are better off, if their hammocks happen to be near the doors, which are made of upright
battens, six inches apart, for the light in the passage BURNS ALL NIGHT and they can read as long as
they like. Even with this advantage, however, most men far prefer the cells to the wards, and It is no
wonder when one considers the talk likely to be carried on between 12 desperate men deprived of their
liberty, and reflects on the filthy crimes which it is openly said are, at times, committed by them. As has
been said, the men in the cells cannot be spied on from the outside except in the observation cells. These
are used for the confinement of men who are sick or suspected of an in-clination to suicide or
masturbation and so on. These can be watched, unknown to themselves at any time.

Confinement to cells (or dark cells) is the chief form punishment takes on St. Helena. Seven days light
cells means that a man is kept that number of days IN A SMALL CELL for 23 hours out of the 24, and is
only allowed half-rations. He is allowed one hour's exercise in the probation yard, which is about 25 yards
long by six or seven yards wide. Only one man is allowed to exercise at a time, and the warders on
probation duty take it week about to look after them. Most warders' duties are taken for a week at a time,
for instance, the warder who counts in and out at the gate is on duty for a week. If seven days confinement
to cells is given by a magistrate the prisoner loses three

weeks' indulgence; if it is given by the superintendent he loses 15 days for every seven off his remission
(two months in every 12). On completion of his punish-ment the man is returned to his yard. Confinement
IN THE DARK CELLS is for the same number of hours as in the ordinary cells - 23 out of 24, and the
loss of indulgence is at the same rate. In this connection days on remand before punishment count as
punishment. The sick are not too well treated at St. Helena. If a man goes sick he is placed in

a small cell on sick ration, that is, about half the full ration. He is allowed no tea, and— greatest
deprivation of all— no book. An old warder doses him with oil (the only' medicine) if he considers he
requires a dose. If the patient's temperature rises above a certain point he is sent to the hospital for
treatment, otherwise he may remain in the cells for months. Not so long ago, Joe Frisby, who was sick in
his cell, hung himself there, and was only discovered by chance before LIFE WAS EXTINCT. He was at
once cut down and sent to the hospital. Men suffering, say from rheuma-

tism, have been known to be kept three months in their cells, simply because ap-parently the old warder
aforesaid did not think they were fit subjects for hospital. The doctor visits the island once a week, unless
in a case of urgency, when he is wired for. The sick in cells are supposed to carry out and empty their own
buckets, but if they are obviously unable to do so a black-fellow is employed for the purpose. Can
anything more barbarous be conceived -men suffering from or sickening for perhaps a nervous disorder,

left in solitude entirely to their own resources except for the tender mercies of an ignorant old warder. Can
any

treatment more calculated to drive a man to despair AND SELF-DESTRUCTION be imagined? The
commissariat department at St. Helena causes much complaining. Until two months ago, when three
supply boats were put on, the meat was constantly rotten, so rotten that it could be noticed as soon as the
men entered the yard. Com-plaints to the superintendent were frequent, but productive of nothing; he
would say the meat was good, and the men could get no redress. The meat is taken from the boat to the
butchers, weighed, and the best of it is taken for the superintendent, the comp-troller, and the chief warder.
Then what is to go to the prisoners is chopped up for the messes according to scale, under the super-vision
of the warder in charge and chief cook. It is put into nets, THROWN INTO A BARROW and wheeled to
tho kitchen, where seven convict cooks are employed. There it is generally boiled, and the cooks can take
what they want for themselves and their pals, as the warder in charge never sees the meat cooked. When
cooked, the warder in charge sees it put on the trollies for the yards. The men constantly complain of short
weight. They take the meat up, and it is weighed, and a ration has been found to scale only 8oz., bone
included, instead of 16. This reduction in weight is said to be due to cooking, that is all the satisfaction the
men get. If the meat is bad — that is, so bad as to be noticeable, charcoal is thrown into the boiler. This
has the effect of taking the smell away, but of course does not affect the QUALITY OF THE MEAT If,
however, the men take the meat to the superintendent with a complaint, he simply sniffs it, says "there's no
smell," and the men are sent away without any redress. If matters go so far that the cook and butchers are
called up, they, of course, side with the superintendent. The stereotyped answer is always returned to the
complainants, "It's as good as you'd got outside." On one occa-sion lately, tainted meat was taken by the

prisoners before the doctor, who admitted it was not good, but nothing was done. The trouble seems to lie
in the fact that the warder who supervises the kitchen has also charge of the bakery. He is a baker by trade,
and it Is easy to see where he would be likely to put in most of his time. In many cases he cannot
SATISFACTORILY SUPERVISE both departments. It has been suggested that the cooks should be placed
on the same scale as the other prisoners, and the cooking carried out under the eye of a warder specially
detailed for that duty, also that the cooks should feed with the other prisoners. The scale laid down is
acknow-ledged to be ample, if only it is properly cooked and served out, and no filching occurs. The
warders, of whom there are 40 on the island are, take them all-round, a good body of men, who perform a
very ob-noxious duty firmly and impartially. Of course, there are black sheep among them, and the
prisoners' chief complaint against them is that they are too apt to make favorites. This, of course, is an
indictment which could be levelled against the bulk of humanity, but if there are men WHO SHOULD BE
CAREFUL, more than others that they should never be liable to a suspicion of favouring one more than
another, they are prison warders— men

who are responsible for the care, well-being, and safe custody of those who have broken society's laws. It
is openly said on the island that if a prisoner, perhaps inadver-tently, makes himself objectionable to the
warder, he is blackballed and is constantly "brought up." A case is cited of a prisoner who requested to be
transferred to Boggo-road on account of the way he was per-secuted at St. Helena. The most coveted
positions among the prisoners are billets— vanman, buggyman, hospital men, clerks, and so on. These
men are allowed to go about practically unwatched, though most of them have to attend the roll-call -
some

do not even HAVE TO DO THAT. In the making of these appointments, it is said the greatest favoritism is
shown, and the men, knowing this, plot, mine, and countermine. "Informing" to curry favor is resorted to,
and all sorts of underhand work indulged in. A striking example of the extent to which favoritism is
carried is afforded by the "pet crowd." These men do simply as they like. They have two good meat meals
a day, butter, milk, and so on. (To be continued.)

