Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444
DOI 10.1007/s10761-013-0228-z




An Overview of Historical Archaeology
in Queensland, Australia

Cameron S. Harvey



Published online: 26 June 2013
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013



Abstract The ability of historical archaeology to make a significant contribution to
our understanding of Queensland’s recent past is hindered by factors including few
practitioners, limited publications about historical archaeological research and a need
to establish its relevance beyond the archaeological community. There exists great
opportunities in Queensland for researchers to explore a diverse range of research topics of
which only some are beginning to be investigated through historical archaeological
enquiry. This paper investigates the current state of the discipline in Queensland, the
challenges practitioners face today and into the future, and the avenues down which
historical archaeologists may make significant contributions to our understanding of
Queensland’s recent past.

Keywords Queensland . Australia . Heritage registers .
Archaeological heritage management


Introduction

Queensland is a vast and diverse place. Comprising a landmass of over 1.7 million km2
(about seven times the size of the entire British Isles or slightly larger than the US state of
Texas), it is home to diversity in climate, geography and culture (Fig. 1). As Evans (2007,
p. 3) notes in his historical overview of Queensland, the state features “striking variety,
curiosity and excess” which is “all held and reflected in its human history.” The human
occupation of Queensland extends as far back as 60,000 years, though the last
188 years of non-Indigenous settlement and exploitation have modified the
landscape significantly and fundamentally and a completely different range of
material culture to that which existed before has been introduced. The physical
evidence is both a diverse record of the experiences and challenges faced by
those who worked and lived in Queensland and a resource for scholars to
investigate and enhance our knowledge and understanding. This paper contains a

C. S. Harvey (*)
Niche Environment and Heritage Pty Ltd, Brisbane, Queensland 4017, Australia
e-mail: charvey@niche-eh.com

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                                429




Fig. 1 Map of Queensland showing place locations mentioned


brief outline of the development of the discipline in Queensland and some of the issues
which confront practitioners in today. I conclude by examining some of the issues that must
be addressed to ensure a continuation in growth of the discipline in Queensland.


The Queensland Context

Historical archaeology in Queensland remains an emerging field. It is only in the last
decade that a substantial body of literature on the subject began to appear in local and
publications. The discipline developed in the 1970s along the same lines as it did in

430                                                Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444


other states and territories of Australia and its general emergence has been well
documented and discussed by others (e.g. Connah 1988; Mulvaney 1996). The
first documented historical archaeological excavation occurred in 1975 at the
site of former Royal Bull’s Head Inn in rural Drayton, southern Queensland. As
a National Trust of Queensland sponsored project, the work at Drayton sought
to employ archaeological excavation to “aid the complete and accurate restora-
tion of historic buildings” at the site (van Proctor 1975, pp. 4–5). Excavation
was undertaken by volunteers and aimed to relocate traces of original buildings
long since removed. The project was considered more an experiment than a
research orientated exercise, though van Proctor (1975, p. 5) noted that it was
“a model dig” and “a worthy precedent for future projects sponsored by the
National Trust”. Unfortunately, no such project of this type has been attempted
again by the Trust in Queensland.
   Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, historical archaeology-specific projects
were few in number or undertaken as little more than an aside to Aboriginal
archaeological site identification within large environmental impact assessment
projects. One notable exception was the 1979 excavation of the Commissariat
Store in Brisbane, the capital of Queensland. Constructed during 1828–29 and
one of Queensland’s oldest buildings, the Store functioned as the main provi-
sioning point for the issue of goods in the fledgling Moreton Bay Penal
Settlement. Excavations focused on the sub-floor areas within the Store building
with the discovery of a previously undocumented system of brick and stone
drains and numerous artifacts from every phase of occupation and use of the
building (Sanker 1979, pp. 9–10). Artifacts from the Commissariat became the
first significant historical archaeological collection to be added to the Queens-
land Museum’s collections; little, however, has ever been published about the
archaeology, though Murphy (2003, this volume) has since undertaken a re-
examination of the collections.
   The introduction of heritage legislation in Queensland in 1987 provided the
first protection for historical archaeological places and objects. Practitioners
were required to obtain permits from regulatory authorities to undertake archae-
ological surveys and excavations. The first substantial set of historical archae-
ological projects emerged at this time. An early project of note was
Higginbotham’s (1990, 1991) investigations at the site of the former Eagle
Farm Agricultural Settlement. This site dates to one of the earliest phases in
Queensland’s post-contact history and confirmed the survival of significant
amounts of archaeological evidence relating to agricultural activities and a
female (convict) factory. The site has since been afforded legislative protection
due to its significance to Queensland’s history and a management plan was
prepared for the site in 2007 (RA Riddel Architecture 2007).
   Today the Queensland Heritage Act 1992 is the main legislation in Queensland for
the protection and management of historical archaeological places and artifacts. The
establishment of a heritage register in 1992 combined with nearly 20 years of
assessment has amounted to 179 places entered in the register with historical archae-
ological values of significance to Queensland. While the requirement to obtain a
permit to undertake historical archaeological surveys and most excavations was
repealed in 2008 many assessments continue to identify historical archaeological

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                             431


issues as a matter of course, or remain a fundamental requirement of large scale
environmental impact assessments.
   The regulatory supervision applied to historical archaeological investigations of
the late 1980s right through to 2008 did not extend to any requirement to publish
results. Few project reports have indeed turned into actual publications. One notable
exception has been the results of excavations at Lang Park Stadium in Brisbane (e.g.,
Haslam et al. 2003; McGowan and Prangnell 2006, 2009; Prangnell and McGowan
2009, this volume; Rains and Prangnell 2002). Originally the site of the North
Brisbane Burial Grounds and Brisbane’s principal cemetery between 1843 and
1875, salvage excavation was undertaken as part of the redevelopment of the site.
Almost 400 graves were excavated and some human remains were analyzed. The
analysis showed that even an examination of a small sample of the remains created “a
picture which can be used as a means of comparison with historical records, and to
other archaeological studies of Australian cemeteries” (Haslam et al. 2003, p. 6).
   Historical archaeology is currently taught in two Queensland universities—the
University of Queensland, in Brisbane, and at James Cook University in Townsville.
Both institutions feature subjects and post-graduate opportunities in historical archae-
ology. A perusal of post-graduate research topics reveals a range of study interests.
Most recent fields of enquiry relate to topics including ethnicity and minority groups
such as the overseas Chinese (Rains 2004), gender studies (Quirk 2007), the social
contexts of early industry and landscapes (Mate 2010; Murphy 2010) and the impacts
of government policy and institutionalization on people as reflected in material
culture (Beck 2008; Hayes 2000; Prangnell 1999). This diverse range of topics is
reflective of the growth in post-graduate historical archaeological research in Queens-
land beginning in 1990s and continuing to the present day. It indicates that the
emphasis of historical archaeological enquiry in academia in Queensland is focused
on reflexive studies founded in post-processual theory, rather than data collection and
cataloguing activities and the scientific methods of problem-orientated research that
characterized early research in other parts of Australia in the 1970s and 1980s.


Discussion

In 1998, Graham Connah (1998, p. 3) asserted that even though the discipline was
only a couple of decades old in Australia, it was his opinion that it was already facing
a crisis related to two obvious weaknesses. The first related to the significant body of
historical archaeological work being produced but only a small amount being pub-
lished. This meant that valuable data and information about historical archaeological
issues existed but was largely inaccessible to others. The second weakness was what
he and Egloff (1994) had earlier described as the restricted university base of the
discipline in Australia. Connah noted the limited number of historical archaeologists
in academic roles at Australian universities teaching archaeology. Compounding this
was a lack of relevant undergraduate courses.
   According to Connah (1998, p. 5, 2010), the health of a discipline can be measured
against the body of materials published by its practitioners. A search of peer reviewed
publications for articles about Queensland historical archaeology can be used to
assess the validity of Connah’s first assertion. Major sources of archaeological

432                                                  Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444


scholarship in Australia and a scattering of international sources were searched with a
particular focus on the journals Australasian Historical Archaeology, Australian
Archaeology and the Bulletin of the Australian Institute for Maritime Archaeology,
the International Journal of Historical Archaeology, and the International Journal of
Nautical Archaeology. Several locally produced occasional series and monographs
were also included, especially the Memoirs of the Queensland Museum Series,
Queensland Archaeological Research and Tempus.
   A total of 68 peer reviewed articles relating to Queensland historical archae-
ology were identified. This represents limited publication and little to show for
30 years of work across Queensland, averaging just two articles per year since
1975, though there were periods where there was a complete absence of
publications about Queensland topics over several years. The most common
subject of publication has been Queensland’s maritime industry (35 articles).
While the subject may appear to dominate the literature the results are skewed
substantially by the extensive publication of excavation results and analyses
associated with a single site—that of the wreck of HMS Pandora. This ship-
wreck has been subjected to intense interest and effort by the Queensland
Museum since the 1970s (Gesner 1989). World War II and Defense-related
studies (12) were also well represented in available literature, however, many
of these articles were largely historical concerns, or at best descriptive in nature
with limited archaeological analyses. The topic of early exploration, survey and
settlements (9) features a more balanced set of articles. Jack et al. (1984) made
an early contribution on this subject while investigating the site of a Chinese
market garden on the Palmer River Goldfield, one of Queensland’s most
important goldfields of the late nineteenth century. Recent authors show con-
tinuing interest in the topic and move beyond purely descriptive works and site
specific studies, such as Prangnell and Mate’s (2011) investigation of small
gold-mining towns of the Upper Burnett and tangible and intangible elements
of labor heritage, and Prangnell and Quirk (2009) and Quirk’s (2008, 2010,
p. 88) explorations of the “narratives of goldfields life that continue to shape
perceptions of the past.”
   Connah’s second assertion of a restricted university base also rings true today.
There are few people employed as historical archaeologists in Queensland today. At
the time of writing only the University of Queensland has an historical archaeologist
on staff, though many academics working in other Queensland universities also have
experience working on historical archaeological projects. Few historical archaeolo-
gists are employed in the private sector and there are few government positions
dedicated to any form of archaeological practice.
   The development of a sufficient university base and any subsequent increase in the
quantity and quality of published work about Queensland’s historical archaeology
cannot occur without reform to the regulatory systems within which historical
archaeology operates. Queensland has diverse types of historical archaeological
places, some unique within Australia, and prospective researchers need to be more
aware of the research potential of sites in Queensland. Practitioners also need to
convince people outside the discipline that historical archaeology is worth doing and
of relevance beyond a small number of academics and interest groups. These topics
are explored in the remaining sections of this paper.

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                         433


Regulatory Reform

Reforming heritage legislation to improve protection and management of his-
torical archaeological places and artifacts is essential for growing the discipline
in Queensland. Reform should be guided by the needs of the academic and
consulting communities, but the concerns of the general public, property owners
and developers who traditionally face significant costs associated with salvage
archaeology, project redesign and lost time, must be key considerations. Inter-
national standards and agreements relating to historical archaeological heritage,
particularly the International ICOMOS Charter for the Protection and Manage-
ment of Archaeological Heritage (ICOMOS 1990) and the experiences of
countries struggling with similar issues, such as the United States of America
and Canada should be viewed as models to draw upon.
   Any move for legislative reform should also be viewed with some caution
and may not necessarily be the answer to all problems confronting the disci-
pline. When the time comes for a review of the Queensland Heritage Act, what
constitutes “best practice” in historical archaeology today must of course be the
ultimate goal though it must be acknowledged that some compromises will
likely be made. For example, several amendments made to the Queensland
Heritage Act in recent times have not resulted in improvements to archaeolog-
ical practice and even weakened the situation. The requirement for practitioners
to seek government approval for historical archaeological survey and excavation
was removed in 2008. Ever since then potentially destructive work has been
carried out with limited regulatory supervision. On the other hand, some
temporary protection was added for previously unrecorded archaeological sites
located during the course of development or other ground disturbing works.
This requirement, however, is fundamentally flawed and relies on those with
the least to gain from compliance with the legislation (i.e. a developer or
someone hunting historic artifacts for profit such as a bottle collector) to admit
they have found or even destroyed important archaeological evidence. Recent
changes to legislative requirements in other Australian jurisdictions, such as in
New South Wales, have arguably weakened the ability to protect important
places and this should act as a warning. Legislation has been and will continue
to be developed in reference to political motivations that do not necessarily
correlate with the wishes and desires of the archaeological community.


Integrating Archaeological Heritage Management into Planning Systems

The integration of historical archaeological issues within broader planning
frameworks may be the key to more effective management and protection.
The integration of archaeological enquiry with local planning requirements is
an emerging concept in some parts of Australia, though is still in its infancy in
Queensland. The inclusion of legislative provisions in the Queensland Heritage
Act for local heritage registers was a step in the right direction even though
content requirements were broad and local governments could opt out of
including them in their core planning schemes. This could be rectified through

434                                                    Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444


the strengthening of local planning provisions to include a requirement for local
heritage overlays. A standard planning practice in Victoria, these overlays
contain information on a range of heritage places, including historical archae-
ological places, deemed of State or local significance (State Government of
Victoria 2010). Greater cooperation between the different levels of government
and significant capacity building of development assessment officers and plan-
ners within local government would be required to achieve such a goal.
    A greater role for planning in archaeological heritage management has been exam-
ined in Australia within the context of managing the archaeology of urban areas (Iacono
2002, 2005; Murray and Crook 2005). The early identification of archaeological issues
and integration of heritage requirements within planning frameworks is seen to be
critical for effective protection and management. Early identification would reduce the
likelihood of archaeology being the “eleventh hour” inconvenience for developers and
property owners and will allow sufficient opportunity for remedial action before project
budgets, designs and work schedules are set. One tool suggested by Iacono (2002, 2005)
to achieve greater integration is the use of archaeological plans. These plans are usually
produced in the form of a map which displays archaeological potential and are useful for
property owners, managers, and developers taking archaeological considerations into
account early in development planning.
    In 2008–09, the Queensland Government, University of Queensland and the
Brisbane City Council co-operated on a pilot project to develop an archaeological
plan for the central business district area of Brisbane (Prangnell 2009a; Prangnell and
Terry 2008). The plan was developed for eventual integration into Brisbane’s local
planning scheme. As the basic concepts of the plan were intended to be transferable to
other regions of Queensland, it provides a model for the development of other local
planning instruments.


The Queensland Heritage Register as a Research Tool?

The heritage register is primarily used by heritage professionals for understanding the
history and heritage values of specific places or areas under study. As noted previ-
ously, the register includes 179 places with historical archaeological values to
Queensland. A search of comparable registers across Australia shows that Queensland
is in this way performing well in the protection of historical archaeological places
through their identification, significance assessment and registration on the State heri-
tage register (Fig. 2). Since 2003, an average of seven places with historical archaeo-
logical values has been added to the Queensland heritage register each year, averaging
about 17 % of annual registrations. This is close to double the average number added in
the preceding decade. The main reason behind the increase is the addition of a specific
archaeological place category to the register in 2008. Since then 14 places have been
entered specifically for their historical archaeological values. Queensland also recog-
nizes that archaeology is not just a compliance related activity and proactive identifica-
tion and assessment programs for historical archaeological places have been undertaken
in some parts of the State.
   The majority of archaeological places entered in the register have only been
subjected to investigations of sufficient detail to establish archaeological

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                                      435




Fig. 2 Number of heritage registered places with ascribed historical archaeological values



potential and importance to Queensland’s history. Only a few notable excep-
tions have ever been subjected to additional academic scrutiny. Examples
include the Mill Point Settlement site in southeast Queensland (Murphy 2010;
Rae 2005), the Tower Mill (Hall et al. 1996; Prangnell 1991), and the Commis-
sariat Stores (Murphy 2003). The most recent example of additional academic
research within a registered place was by Hadnutt (2010), who examined
artifacts excavated from the Burke and Wills’ Plant Camp. The ill-fated Burke
and Wills expedition of 1860–61 is arguably the most well known Australian
story of exploration. The expedition set out from Melbourne to cross the
Australian continent from south to north and then back again. Some expedition
campsites and blazed trees have been relocated including that of Camp 46, also
known as the “Plant Camp.” A team of researchers from the University of
Melbourne and Royal Society of Victoria relocated the site in 2006 following a
careful re-analysis of records made by the original expedition navigator William
Wills (Leahy 2007). Subsequent archaeological investigations have relocated a
range of artifacts including canvas and leather sewing kit needles, thrust block,
duck bill leather sewing pliers, percussion caps, nipples and bullets consistent
with the caliber, vintage and make of weapons taken on the original expedition
(Fig. 3). Some of these artifacts have been retained by the Queensland Museum
and since analyzed and used in public exhibitions.
    Academic studies of registered places, like those at Mill Point and the Plant Camp
illustrate that historical archaeological places entered in the register are a valuable
resource for researchers. The lack of interest in the register to date may be the result
of a lack of understanding amongst the academic community about what archaeo-
logical research can and cannot be done within a heritage registered place. It is hoped

436                                                        Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444




Fig. 3 Pen nib from the Burke and Wills Plant Camp, remote southwest Queensland


that forthcoming standards and guidelines will help clarify such issues and encourage
greater interest.


Making a Significant Contribution

   The value of historical archaeology should be assessed merely on the basis of its
   contributions to history (Connah 1998, p. 5).

   As practitioners within a relatively young discipline, historical archaeologists in
Queensland have plenty of work ahead of them to fill gaps in our historical under-
standing. While European occupation of the land is short in time span there were
earlier visitations and ephemeral occupations by Asian peoples particularly Macassan
fisherman from around Sulawesi in modern day Indonesia (MacKnight 1969, 1972,
1986). It is unclear when these visits first began though it is assumed that they
commenced sometime in the seventeenth century. Macassans made frequent and repeat
journeys and interacted with local Aboriginal and Islander populations. Trade in tools,
cloth, canoes, and some foods took place and such interactions influenced Aboriginal
language and art (Burningham 1994; Campbell 2002; MacKnight 1973). Evidence of
Macassan activity survives around Australia’s northern coastline mainly in the form of
trepan (sea cucumber) processing sites. To date there has been limited archaeological
interest in the archaeological potential of such subjects even though the remoteness of
the coastline in question may equate to great promise for future researchers.
   The heritage register is also far from representative of the full range of
historical archaeological place types that are known to survive in Queensland.
The majority of entries relate to Queensland’s mining heritage, including rem-
nants of the prolific gold, tin, copper, silver, and rare metals industries of
central and north Queensland in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centu-
ries (Fig. 4). Their recognition is due to a number of studies on the mining
theme initiated by the Queensland Government during the 1990s rather than
any deliberate effort to protect such places (Jane Lennon and Associates and
Pearce 1996; Kerr 1992; Pearson 1994).
   More effort must be directed at the identification of other important and under-
represented archaeological place types. Recent efforts have been made to investigate

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                                                     437




Fig. 4 Queensland heritage-registered places with historical archaeological values grouped by historical category



places and enter in the heritage register places associated with the past control and
discrimination of Indigenous peoples, such as the former Taroom Aboriginal Settle-
ment in central Queensland (Department of Environment and Resource Management
2010; State of Queensland 2012a) and Fantome Island (Department of Environment
and Resource Management 2011; State of Queensland 2012b).
   Fantome Island is located off the north Queensland coast and was the site of a lock
hospital between 1928 and 1945 and a lazaret (or leprosarium) between 1939 and
1973. Both facilities were used for the isolation of Aboriginal, Torres Strait Islander
and South Sea Islander patients or inmates (Fig. 5). The archaeological remnants on
the island are representative of the disproportionate responses of former governments
to the public health issues of venereal diseases and Hansen’s disease (leprosy) as they
affected Aboriginal, Torres Strait Islander and South Sea Islander people. The
archaeological remains illustrate how non-European patients were kept at different
facilities and treated differently to European patients and they provide insights into
the significant work undertaken by religious orders with non-European patients in
Queensland (State of Queensland 2012b).
   Attempts have also been made to relocate some of Queensland’s oldest places,
particularly the first settlement site at Redcliffe in southeast Queensland. In 1823 the
area was chosen as the location of a new penal settlement to accommodate secondary
offenders, those convicts considered of the worst class or who had reoffended while
serving their original sentence of transportation from Britain. It was intended to
control the convicts and affect reform through isolation, hard labor, strict discipline,
and harsh living conditions. On September 1, 1824, the brig Amity set sail from
Sydney with the commandant of the new settlement, Lieutenant Henry Miller, a
detachment of soldiers, their wives and nine children, and an initial complement of 29
convicts (Steele 1972, p. 127; St Pierre 1994, p. 14). A settlement was quickly
established on Redcliff Point at the northern extent of Moreton Bay. Health problems
soon became a feature of the settlement with sickness arising from a lack of fresh

438                                                             Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444




Fig. 5 Carved timber gate posts located at the rear of the Fantome Island Lazaret Sisters’ Quarters


food and supposedly diseases spread by the persistent mosquitoes that inhabited the
area and within 8 months the settlement was relocated to the Brisbane River, the site
of the capital city today.
   Little physical evidence has ever been found from this short lived settlement site.
Local residents have collected artifacts thought to be associated with the settlement,
including convict-style leg-irons discovered in the 1970s and a small collection of
bricks and other portable artifacts now held in the local museum. Recent archaeo-
logical investigations have attempted to located physical remains of the settlement
through non-invasive geophysical surveys of areas of archaeological potential (GBG
Australia 2008a, b; Sonnemann 2010) and archaeological excavation at the probable
location of a freshwater well, the Commandant’s house, and brick kiln (Cosmos
Archaeology 2011; Harris 2011; Prangnell 2009b). No verifiable archaeological
traces of the settlement were located during at the later two locations.
   Queensland’s important early primary industries of timber and sugar have also
been a particular focus of efforts by the Queensland government’s heritage unit. In
2011 the archaeological remains of Morayfield Plantation, one of Queensland’s
earliest sugar plantations, were investigated and entered in the heritage register. The
Caboolture region was one of the first substantial sugar growing districts in south-east
Queensland. George Raff, a prominent settler in the area, established a sugar

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                               439


plantation on the banks of the Caboolture River in 1865 and by 1867 cultivation,
processing, and distilling operations were well and truly established. Raff, a promi-
nent supporter of the use of indentured Islander laborers in the sugar industry, used
men from present day Vanuatu, New Caledonia, and the Solomon Islands to harvest
cane (Hamilton 1994, p. 34; Morrison 1888, pp. 183–184; Tutt 1973, p. 76). While
workers of European origin were housed in solid accommodation, Islander laborers
were not so lucky living in communal quarters (Saunders 1982, p. 116).
   Investigations at Morayfield Plantation continue and fieldwork focuses on identi-
fying additional archaeological traces of the former main residence and plantation
infrastructure, particularly stores and stables buildings, wharves, fence lines, mill, and
early tramway formations (Fig. 6). Historical documentation is limited and it is
expected that future archaeological investigations will provide otherwise unavailable
information about the overall plantation layout, how it compares to other early sugar
plantations around Queensland and the lives of indentured laborers.


Engaging the Public and the Quest for Relevance

   We have to demonstrate in a public way that historical archaeology can tell us a
   lot more than we can learn from historical records, and can tell us different
   things, things that are both important and interesting (Connah 1998, p. 6).

   While the value of the contribution made by historical archaeological scholarship
to our understanding of the recent past is still sometimes debated by the archaeolog-
ical community (Harrison and Schofield 2010) the general public understands the
archaeological discipline through popular culture. In particular, movies, television
series and documentaries depicting treasure hunting, the antiquities trade and a
general fascination with exotic, mysterious and “vanished” ancient civilizations from
other continents appear to dominate archaeological programming to the detriment of
local content. It is no wonder then that amongst 2,100 responses by Australian’s to a




Fig. 6 Remnant stair case from the main Morayfield Plantation residence

440                                                     Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444


recent survey on what Australian heritage means, archaeology was not even men-
tioned (McDonald 2006, p. 1). This oversight is shocking considering that respondents
actually defined heritage very broadly and understood it to include a wide range of objects,
places and experiences (McDonald 2006, p. 3). One could surmise that the majority of
Australians do not know that archaeology is something even done in Australia.
   Australian scholars have noted that when members of the public have some
knowledge of archaeological work that the results are most often considered self
evident or of little public benefit (Allen and North 2000, p. 55; North 2006, p. ii). The
general public is overtly concerned about “historic architecture” and “irreplaceable”
heritage places, such as national icons, with no recognition given to the wide range of
archaeological resources found throughout the country (McDonald 2006, p. 9). This
ignorance of archaeological values is particularly the case where the archaeological
record has been created well within living memory, where the primacy of detailed
documentation and oral accounts leads the public to believe that archaeological
examination of the physical environment is costly and pointless.
   Public perceptions are at odds with those of the professional archaeologist in
Australia whose views have been shaped by academia and by “doing” archaeology
within a dominant heritage management paradigm. Even so, Australian historical
archaeologists continue to battle lack of recognition and acceptance within a broader
heritage establishment which often overlooks the potential value of the discipline and
sometimes even its very existence. Heritage assessment criteria, developed by heritage
bodies and government agencies, continue to reinforce perceptions that archaeology can
only contribute anything of consequence when such information could not otherwise be
obtained from other sources such as the documentary record (Queensland Heritage
Council 2006, pp. 16–17; State of New South Wales 2001, p. 20). Recent discussions
about the future of Australia’s heritage programs also continue to promote the nation’s
tangible heritage as revolving around the “built and natural environments” with little
recognition of the existence of archaeological phenomena (Spearitt 2011).
   Archaeological projects in Queensland have begun to contribute substantive
work that may help break down public misconceptions and expose the value of
archaeological research to the broader heritage community. Archaeological in-
vestigations at The Eagle’s Nest Depression Camp, near Toowoomba in south-
ern Queensland, is one recent example. Established in 1932 at the height of the
Great Depression, the camp housed and feed unemployed men. Assumed to
have been too ephemeral in nature to leave behind any significant archaeolog-
ical traces, substantial surface and subsurface remains were detected and exca-
vated. Barker and Lamb (2009) identified that the archaeology was “a symbol
of main-stream middle-class Australian values…a material symbol of the work
ethic central at this time to notions of human dignity, respect and the moral
development of individuals” (Barker and Lamb 2009, p. 263). Barker and Lamb
(2009) also point out that while considerable historical scholarship has been carried out
on aspects of the Great Depression and its effects across Australia, the issue has been
almost been entirely ignored by the archaeological community.
   It is important to find effective methods to increase general community
awareness of historical archaeology as a discipline and its potential to contrib-
ute in new ways to our understanding of the past. The Pandora Project is a
rare example of a historical archaeological project in Queensland that has

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                                                 441


succeeded in communicating its findings to both academic and general audi-
ences. A British Naval frigate, HMS Pandora, was bound for Timor after
searching the South Pacific for mutineers from HMS Bounty when she wrecked
on the Great Barrier Reef in 1791. The wreck was relocated in 1977 and has been
subjected to one of the most extensive and expensive archaeological investigations in
Queensland history. Over 10 field seasons the Queensland Museum has recovered
thousands of artifacts. A significant amount of funding was raised to undertake these
excavations and follow-up research into the finds including numerous peer reviewed
articles on the subject (e.g. Campbell and Gesner 2000; Coleman 1988; Fallowfield
2001; Gesner 1989, 1990, 1993, 2000a, b; Henderson 1980, 1984; Illidge 2002;
McCafferty 1989). The collection was considered of such significance that a museum
was founded in Townsville dedicated to the collection.


Concluding Remarks

It has been illustrated that limited historical archaeological research relative to the
actual extent of the resource has been undertaken in Queensland since the first
excavations in the 1970s. The potential for the discipline in Queensland to contribute
to academic discussion and debate on a range of topical issues and particular aspects
of Queensland’s history is immeasurable and unlikely to be realized to any great
extent without substantial growth in the number of practitioners actually “doing”
historical archaeology and, most importantly practitioners, publishing their results.
Closely related are the benefits of ensuring that the results of historical archaeological
endeavors are of relevance beyond the academic community. More needs to be done
to ensure that the results of a broad range of archaeological projects, from data
obtained from academic research through to regulatory projects, find their way into
the public domain.
   It has been argued that any real increase in the actual number of practitioners in
Queensland will not take place if suitable regulatory systems are not developed that
foster such growth. At present it is the existence of regulatory requirements for
archaeological investigations within certain development contexts that provide much
of the historical archaeological work in Queensland. Any regulatory reform faces the
challenge of balancing the desires of the archaeological community for best practice
standards with often conflicting political motivations. To achieve effective reform,
regulators must be convinced of the benefits of embracing a more inclusive under-
standing of cultural heritage as existing attitudes to planning issues seldom embrace
concepts of archaeological potential or move beyond the recognition of built fabric.
   Queensland is a vast and diverse place with a rich historical archaeological resource
of great potential for increasing our understanding of the recent past. There exists great
opportunities for researchers with a wide range of issues so far unexplored through
archaeological enquiry. Much of this potential can only be realized once the discipline
has achieved greater relevance within the broader community.

Acknowledgments Any errors or omissions in this article are my own. The opinions expressed also
remain my own and unless referenced to specific legislation, policy or guidelines do not necessarily reflect
those of my employer or the Queensland government.

442                                                                Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444


References

Allen, C., and North, M. A. (2000). Review of Historical Archaeology Planning Systems and Practice in
    New South Wales, New South Wales Heritage Office, Parramatta.
Barker, B. C., and Lamb, L. D. (2009). The archaeology of poverty and human dignity: charity and the
    work ethic in a 1930s Depression era itinerant’s camp on the Toowoomba Range escarpment,
    Queensland. Archaeologies: Journal of the World Archaeological Congress 5(2): 263–279.
Beck, S. (2008). Maritime Mechanisms of Contact and Change: Archaeological Perspectives on the History
    and Conduct of the Queensland Labour Trade, Doctoral dissertation, James Cook University, Townsville.
Burningham, N. (1994). Aboriginal nautical art: a record of the Macassan and the pearling industry in
    northern Australia. The Great Circle 16: 139–151.
Campbell, J. (2002). Invisible Invaders: Smallpox and Other Diseases in Aboriginal Australia 1780–1880,
    Melbourne University Press, Carlton.
Campbell, J., and Gesner, P. (2000). Illustrated catalogue of artifacts from the HMS Pandora wrecksite
    excavations 1977–1995. Memoirs of the Queensland Museum Cultural Heritage Series 2(1): 53–159.
Coleman, R. (1988). A “Taylor’s” common pump from HMS Pandora (1791). International Journal of Nautical
    Archaeology 17(3): 201–204.
Connah, G. (1988). “Of the Hut I Builded”: The Archaeology of Australia’s history, Cambridge University
    Press, Sydney.
Connah, G. (1998). Pattern and purpose in historical archaeology. Australasian Historical Archaeology 16: 3–7.
Connah, G. (2010). Writing About Archaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cosmos Archaeology (2011). Archaeological Investigation of the “Convict Well,” Ambassador Hotel,
    Redcliffe, Department of Environment and Resource Management, Brisbane.
Department of Environment and Resource Management (2010). Results of Archaeological Investigations at
    the Former Taroom Aboriginal Reserve (Bundulla), Heritage Branch, Brisbane.
Department of Environment and Resource Management (2011). Results of Archaeological Investigations at
    Fantome Island, Great Palm Island Group, North Queensland, Heritage Branch, Brisbane.
Egloff, B. J. (1994). From Swiss Family Robinson to Sir Russell Drysdale: towards changing the tone of
    historical archaeology in Australia. Australian Historical Archaeology 12: 3–5.
Evans, R. (2007). A History of Queensland, Cambridge University Press, Melbourne.
Fallowfield, T. (2001). Polynesian fishing implements from HMS Pandora. The Bulletin of the Australian
    Institute for Maritime Archaeology 25: 5.
GBG Australia (2008a). Geophysical Investigation Using Ground Penetrating Radar and Magnetic Gradiom-
    eter for First Settlement Sites, Sutton Street Redcliffe, Queensland, Redcliffe City Library, Redcliffe.
GBG Australia (2008b). Geophysical Investigation Using Ground Penetrating Radar and Magnetic
    Gradiometer for First Settlement Sites, Anzac Avenue, Queensland, Redcliffe City Library, Redcliffe.
Gesner, P. (1989). The Pandora project: reviewing genesis and rationale. The Bulletin of the Australian
    Institute for Maritime Archaeology 12(1): 27–36.
Gesner, P. (1990). Situation report: HMS Pandora. The Bulletin of the Australian Institute for Maritime
    Archaeology 14(2): 47.
Gesner, P. (1993). Managing Pandora’s box: the 1993 Pandora expedition. The Bulletin of the Australian
    Institute for Maritime Archaeology 17(2): 7.
Gesner, P. (2000a). Pandora: An Archaeological Perspective, Queensland Museum, Brisbane.
Gesner, P. (2000b). HMS Pandora project: a report on stage 1: five seasons of excavation. Memoirs of the
    Queensland Museum Cultural Heritage Series 2(1): 1–52.
Hadnutt, N. (2010). Identifying Camp 46r, the Burke and Wills “Plant Camp,” Bachelor of Arts Honors
    dissertation, University of Queensland, Brisbane.
Hall, J., Prangnell, J., and David, B. (1996). The Tower Mill: an archaeological excavation of Queensland’s
    oldest extant building. Queensland Archaeological Research 10: 1–6.
Hamilton, P. (1994). Sugar from the Scrub: A Pictorial History of Walkerston, Boolarong Press, Brisbane.
Harris, J. (2011). Analysis of Nails from the Convict Well, Ambassador Hotel, Redcliffe, Cosmos Archaeology,
    Murwillumbah.
Harrison, R., and Schofield, A. J. (2010). After Modernity: Archaeological Approaches to the Contempo-
    rary Past, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Haslam, M., Prangnell, J., Kirkwood, L., McKeough, A., Murphy, A., and Loy, T. (2003). A Lang Park mystery:
    analysis of remains from a 19th century burial in Brisbane, Queensland. Australian Archaeology 56: 1–7.
Hayes, L. (2000). Pacific Islanders on Queensland Plantations: Archaeological Landscapes of Power and
    Survival in the 19th Century, Doctoral dissertation, James Cook University, Townsville.

Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444                                                                 443

Henderson, G. (1980). Finds from the wreck of HMS Pandora. International Journal of Nautical
     Archaeology 9(3): 237–243.
Henderson, G. (1984). Aspects of the 1983 HMS Pandora expedition: the 1983 excavation season. The
     Bulletin of the Australian Institute for Maritime Archaeology 8(2): 10–17.
Higginbotham, E. (1990). Historical and Archaeological Assessment of the Eagle Farm Agricultural
     Establishment, Female Factory and Prison, Eagle Farm, Brisbane, Queensland, Australian Construc-
     tion Services, Brisbane.
Higginbotham, E. (1991). Archaeological Assessment of the Eagle Farm Agricultural Establishment,
     Female Factory and Prison, Eagle Farm, Brisbane, Queensland: Stage 2, Australian Construction
     Services, Brisbane.
Iacono, N. (2002). Beyond the breach: advancing strategies for archaeological management plans.
     Australasian Historical Archaeology 20: 39–47.
Iacono, N. (2005). Managing the Archaeology of the Modern City. Doctoral dissertation, La Trobe
     University, Victoria.
Illidge, P. (2002). The Tahitian mourner’s costume from HMS Pandora. The Bulletin of the Australian
     Institute for Maritime Archaeology 26: 65.
ICOMOS (1990). Charter for the Protection and Management of the Archaeological Heritage. UNESCO-
     ICOMOS Documentation Centre. Available online from http://www.international.icomos.org/charters/
     arch_e.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2013.
Jack, I., Holmes, K., and Kerr, R. (1984). Ah Toy’s garden: a Chinese market-garden on the Palmer River
     Goldfield, North Queensland. Australian Journal of Historical Archaeology 2: 51–58.
Jane Lennon and Associates, and Pearce, H. (1996). Mining Heritage Places Study, Northern and Western
     Queensland, Cultural Heritage Branch, Department of Environment, Brisbane.
Kerr, R. (1992). Queensland Historical Mining Sites Study, Department of Environment and Heritage, Brisbane.
Leahy, F. (2007). Locating the “Plant Camp” of the Burke and Wills expedition. Journal of Spatial Science
     52(2): 1–12.
MacKnight, C. C. (1969). The Macassans: A Study of the Early Trepanging Industry Along the Northern
     Territory Coast. Doctoral dissertation, Australian National University, Canberra.
MacKnight, C. C. (1972). Macassans and Aborigines. Oceania 42: 283–319.
MacKnight, C. C. (1973). The nature of early maritime trade: some points of analogy from the eastern part
     of the Indonesian archipelago. World Archaeology 5: 198–208.
MacKnight, C. C. (1986). Macassans and the Aboriginal past. Archaeology in Oceania 21: 69–75.
Mate, G. (2010). Mining the Landscape: Finding the Social in the Industrial Through an Archaeology of
     the Landscapes of Mount Shamrock, Doctoral dissertation, University of Queensland, St Lucia,
     Queensland.
McCafferty, M. (1989). Direct linear transformation: a case study based on HMS Pandora. The Bulletin of
     the Australian Institute for Maritime Archaeology 12(1): 51–55.
McDonald, H. (2006). Understanding Public Involvement with Australian Heritage: Final Research
     Report, Deakin University, Victoria.
McGowan, G., and Prangnell, J. (2006). The significance of vivianite in archaeological settings.
     Geoarchaeology 21: 93–111.
McGowan, G., and Prangnell, J. (2009). “The truth will out”: recycling of packing timber to construct a
     nineteenth century Australian coffin. Australian Archaeology 68: 56–58.
Morrison, W. F. (1888). Aldine History of Queensland, vol. 1, Aldine, Sydney.
Mulvaney, J. (1996). “Musing amidst the ruins…”: the development of historical archaeology in Australia.
     Australasian Historical Archaeology 14: 3–8.
Murphy, K. (2003). Under the boards: The study of archaeological site formation processes at the
     Commissariat Store Site, Brisbane. Bachelor of Arts (Honors) dissertation, University of Queensland,
     St Lucia, Queensland.
Murphy, K. (2010). Archaeology of Social Interaction, Practices and Community in Colonial Australia,
     Doctoral dissertation, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland.
Murray, T., and Crook, P. (2005). Exploring the archaeology of the modern city: issues of scale, integration
     and complexity. International Journal of Historical Archaeology 9: 89–109.
North, M. A. (2006). Protecting the Past for the Public Good: Archaeology and Australian Heritage Law.
     Doctoral dissertation, University of Sydney, New South Wales.
Pearson, M. (1994). Mining Heritage Places Study, Stage 2B: Southern and Central Queensland,
     Queensland Department of Environment and Heritage, Brisbane.
Prangnell, J. (1991). Brisbane’s Tower Mill: Archaeological Investigation and Explanation of a Historic
     Urban Site. Bachelor of Arts (Honors) dissertation, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland.

444                                                                 Int J Histor Archaeol (2013) 17:428–444

Prangnell, J. (1999). Intended Solely for their Greater Comfort and Happiness: Historical Archaeology,
     Paternalism and the Peel Island Lazaret. Doctoral dissertation, University of Queensland, St Lucia,
     Queensland.
Prangnell, J. (2009a). The Brisbane City CBD Archaeological Plan: Phases 2, 3 and 4, University of
     Queensland Archaeological Services Unit, University of Queensland, St Lucia.
Prangnell, J. (2009b). Redcliffe First Settlement Archaeological Project: Stage 2: December 2008 Field
     Season, University of Queensland Archaeological Services Unit, University of Queensland, St Lucia.
Prangnell, J., and Mate, G. (2011). Kin, fictive kin and strategic movement: working class heritage of the
     Upper Burnett. International Journal of Heritage Studies 17: 318–330.
Prangnell, J., and McGowan, G. (2009). Soil temperature calculation for burial site analysis. Forensic
     Science International 191: 104–109.
Prangnell, J., and Quirk, K. (2009). Children in paradise: growing up on the Australian goldfields.
     Historical Archaeology 43(3): 38–49.
Prangnell, J., and Terry, L. (2008). The Brisbane City CBD Archaeological Plan: Phase 1, University of
     Queensland Archaeological Services Unit, University of Queensland, St Lucia.
Queensland Heritage Council (2006). Using the Criteria: A Methodology, Queensland Heritage Council, Brisbane.
Quirk, K. (2007). The Victorians in “Paradise”: Gentility as Social Strategy in the Archaeology of Colonial
     Australia. Doctoral dissertation, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland.
Quirk, K. (2008). The colonial goldfields: visions and revisions. Australasian Historical Archaeology 26: 13–20.
Quirk, K. (2010). Reply to a “Straw Person in Paradise”. Australasian Historical Archaeology 28: 88.
RA Riddel Architecture (2007). Eagle Farm Agricultural Establishment Cultural Heritage Management
     Plan, RA Riddel Architecture, Brisbane.
Rae, E. (2005). Uncovering Mill Point: Understanding Concepts of Space at Australian Historic Sawmills.
     Bachelor of Arts (Honors) dissertation, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland.
Rains, K. (2004). Intersections: The Overseas Chinese Social Landscape of Cooktown 1873–1935.
     Doctoral dissertation, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland.
Rains, K., and Prangnell, J. (2002). Background to the University of Queensland Archaeological Services
     Unit’s Lang Park salvage excavations: history, significance assessment and methods. Queensland
     Archaeological Research 13: 21–30.
Sanker, I. G. (1979). Final Report: Historical Archaeological Investigation, Commissariat Store, Queensland
     Museum, Brisbane.
Saunders, K. (1982). Workers in Bondage: The Origins and Bases of Unfree Labour in Queensland 1824–
     1916, University of Queensland Press, St Lucia.
Sonnemann, T. (2010). Ground Penetrating Radar Survey at Redcliffe First Settlement Well at Redcliffe
     Parade, Redcliffe, Queensland, Department of Environment and Resource Management, Brisbane.
Spearitt, P. (2011). Essay: What is Heritage? Australian Heritage Strategy, Canberra.
St Pierre, J. (1994). Moreton Bay Detachment 1824–25: The Soldiers who Served at Redcliffe Convict
     Settlement, Redcliffe Historical Society, Redcliffe.
State Government of Victoria (2010). The Heritage Overlay Guidelines 15: Archaeological Sites, Heritage
     Victoria and Victorian Heritage Council, Melbourne.
State of New South Wales (2001). Assessing Heritage Significance, a NSW Heritage Manual Update, New
     South Wales Heritage Office, Parramatta.
State of Queensland (2012a). Taroom Aboriginal Settlement (former), Queensland Heritage Register entry
     602769. <https://www.derm.qld.gov.au/chimsi/placeDetail.html?siteId=25109>.
State of Queensland (2012b). Fantome Island Lock Hospital and Lazaret Sites (Former), Queensland Heritage
     Register entry 602798. <https://www.derm.qld.gov.au/chimsi/placeDetail.html?siteId=32314>.
Steele, J. G. (1972). The Explorers of the Moreton Bay District 1770–1830, University of Queensland
     Press, St Lucia.
Tutt, S. (1973). Caboolture Country: Stories of the Area Once Controlled by the Caboolture Divisional
     Board, Shires of Pine Rivers, Caboolture, Kilcoy, Landsborough and Maroochy, City of Redcliffe,
     Caboolture Historical Society, Caboolture.
Van Proctor, J. (1975). Digging at the Royal Bull’s Head Inn, Drayton, Toowoomba. Australian Society for
     Historical Archaeology Newsletter 5(2): 3–5.

