      Australian Historical Studies




      ISSN: 1031-461X (Print) 1940-5049 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rahs20




The State, Convicts and Longitudinal Analysis

Hamish Maxwell-Stewart

To cite this article: Hamish Maxwell-Stewart (2016) The State, Convicts and Longitudinal Analysis,
Australian Historical Studies, 47:3, 414-429, DOI: 10.1080/1031461X.2016.1203963

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/1031461X.2016.1203963




       Published online: 31 Aug 2016.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 999



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data



       Citing articles: 4 View citing articles




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rahs20

      The State, Convicts and Longitudinal Analysis
                                     HAMISH MAXWELL-STEWART




In 2006 the Records of the Tasmanian Convict Department were inscribed on the UNESCO
Memory of the World Register. This extraordinarily intact collection of records document the
lives of 73,000 male and female prisoners transported to Van Diemen’s Land. This article
examines ways in which this information can be used to explore the impact of forced labour
migration on the lives of convicts. It focuses in particular on the assembly of cradle-to-grave
datasets. Such longitudinal approaches to the past can be powerful, especially where they
involve the analysis of multiple life course events for a large number of individuals. The <U+FB01>rst
     part of the article explores ways in which quantitative approaches can be used to
 reconstruct the circumstances that shaped the creation of record groups. The second part
examines the way in which longitudinal analysis can be used to analyse the impact of state
                                 action on the lives of convicts.



The rise of the prison as an institution of mass incarceration for offenders has long
fascinated historians. Since the 1970s a series of in<U+FB02>uential works have explored the
shift in punishment from the body to the mind that accompanied the increased use
of imprisonment as an instrument of justice. Much of this literature has focused on
the role prisons played in the shaping of a new form of relationship between the
state and its citizens.1 Important as these works are, there have been fewer attempts
to describe the impact of imprisonment and punishment on the lives of prisoners
and their families, or to use the data recorded in prison registers and related criminal
justice record series to explore conditions experienced by working-class populations.
     It is often the most marginalised members of society who are targeted by
states and, as a result, have their lives documented in archival collections. This
is especially true of those who run afoul of the law. From the late eighteenth
century, prisons and court systems started to maintain ever more detailed regis-
ters of offenders. As a record of prior conviction was one of the factors that judges
took into consideration when determining sentencing options, it became increas-
ingly important to document offending histories. As a result, information was
routinely circulated between courts, prisons and other institutions. A striking
feature of this was the speed with which such record-keeping systems were
adopted across jurisdictions, including colonial societies.

For background on this Forum on Big Data and the articles in this issue please see the free-to-access
editorial in this issue, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1031461X.2016.1208728
 1
   See, in particular, Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (London: Penguin,
   1977); and Michael Ignatieff, A Just Measure of Pain: The Penitentiary in the Industrial Revolution
   1705–1850 (New York: Pantheon, 1978).

414

                             Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis         415



      Because they were interested in tracking offenders, criminal justice records
often included information absent in other series. Details of offenders, heights,
their scars, tattoos and other physical deformities, the names of next of kin,
place of birth and literacy, were all routinely collected by nineteenth-century
police, prison and other penal institutions. Such records are particularly useful
because they include information for women as well as men. This article
reviews a range of ways in which the data employed to regulate the lives of
the 73,000 or so convicts who were sentenced to penal servitude in Van
Diemen’s Land between 1803 and 1853 can be used to shed light on convict
lived experience.
      Perhaps because of the detailed nature of the record groups assembled to
regulate their lives, convicts transported to Australia have been the subject of a
number of previous quantitative exercises. Early studies focused on the crimi-
nality of transportees, attempting to establish the extent to which they had a
record of offending prior to being sentenced to penal labour in Australia.2 Sub-
sequent re-assessments placed much greater emphasis on the skills that convicts
brought to the Australian colonies.3 Detailed studies of the convicts transported
on individual ships have helped to considerably <U+FB02>esh out this picture.4 There
have also been a number of pioneering explorations of the manner in which
convict labour was organised, punished and rewarded.5
      The data employed in this article was assembled in order to explore the
impact of transportation on health, socio-economic wellbeing and rates of offend-
ing. This work forms part of a larger investigation into the relative impacts that
penal transportation and incarceration in nineteenth-century British institutions
had on the lives of prisoners.6 Rather than targeting a single record group, the aim
has been to link many series that contain information about the same individual.
In the case of transported convicts this includes British hulk records, the surgeons’
journals compiled during the voyage to Australia, convict indents and description
lists compiled on disembarkation and conduct records containing summaries of



2
  L. L. Robson, Convict Settlers of Australia (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1967); and James
  F. H. Moore, Convicts of Van Diemen’s Land (Hobart: Cat & Fiddle Press, 1976).
3
  S. Nicholas, ed., Convict Workers: Reinterpreting Australia’s Past (Cambridge: Cambridge University
  Press, 1988); D. Oxley, Convict Maids: The Forced Migration of Women to Australia (Cambridge: Cam-
  bridge University Press, 1996); and N. J. Meinzer, ‘The Western Australian Convicts’, Australian
  Economic History Review 55, no. 2 (2015): 163–86.
4
  B. Smith, A Cargo of Women: Susannah Watson and the Convicts of the Princess Royal (Sydney: University
  of New South Wales Press, 1988); D. Kent and N. Townsend, The Convicts of the Eleanor: Protest in
  Rural England, New Lives in Australia (London: Pluto Press, 2002); and Lucy Frost, Abandoned
  Women: Scottish Convicts Exiled Beyond the Seas (Sydney: Allen and Unwin, 2012).
5
  D. Meredith and D. Oxley, ‘Contracting Convicts: The Convict Labour Market in Van Diemen’s
  Land, 1840–1857’, Australian Economic History Review 45, no. 1 (2005): 45–72; D. Roberts, ‘A
  “Change of Place”: Illegal Movement on the Bathurst Frontier, 1822–1825’, Journal of Australian
  Colonial History 7 (2005): 97–122; and C. Nunn, ‘Juveniles as Human Capital: Re-evaluating the
  Economic Value of Juvenile Male Convict Labour’, Labour History 108 (2015): 53–69.
6
  See ‘The Digital Panopticon: The Global Impact of London Punishments’, www.digitalpanopticon.
  org (accessed 25 May 2016).

416   Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


court appearances and punishments for convicts under sentence in Van Diemen’s
Land.
     Since these records contain a series of internal identi<U+FB01>ers this process is labor-
ious, but otherwise not technically dif<U+FB01>cult. Tasmanian convict records regularly
include the ship of arrival in the colony and the convict’s police number. Infor-
mation about age and date and court of trial can be used to link these series to
records compiled by British and Irish criminal justice systems.
     The process of connecting prisoners with information about their pre-transpor-
tation families or details of their lives post-release is more complicated but is assisted
by the nature of the data assembled to regulate their institutional lives. Record
linkage to nineteenth-century British census data, for example, is facilitated by
knowledge of the convict’s next of kin recorded on arrival in Australia. Information
about post-release offending can be retrieved from a number of record sources
including the colonial police gazettes, a series of weekly publications that printed
details of convicted criminals including the ship that brought them to the colony.
Such longitudinal approaches can be powerful, especially where they involve the
analysis of multiple life-course events for a large number of individuals.7 They also
offer the potential to explore the intergenerational impact of forced labour migration.
They are not, however, unproblematic.
     The legal document that held a convict in place was an indenture. It was this that
conferred charge of the convict to the master of the vessel for the duration of the
voyage to Australia. Upon landing, property rights in the body of the prisoner
passed back to the state, although it was common practice for these to be subsequently
assigned, loaned or hired out to private masters and mistresses. The close relationship
between the state and the private sector shaped the colonial archive. The use of archi-
tectural restraints was impractical in a colony where the economy depended upon the
<U+FB02>exible deployment of unfree labour. As a result, record systems largely substituted for
cell walls. Without paperwork there was no way of separating those members of the
colonial working class who were bound by a sentence from those that were not. The
descriptions of runaway prisoners circulated in the pages of the Government Gazette and
other colonial newspapers helped to determine who was government lost property.
     It was not just important to punish those whose indiscretions landed them in
a colonial courtroom. The stain of conviction had to be made indelible. Every
quarter each magistrates’ bench was tasked with drawing up a summary of all
charges that had been brought against convicts and former convicts. It was
these that were laboriously transcribed into the conduct registers. The volumes
that made up this series contained the information that the colonial state used
to <U+FB01>x the severity of sanctions applied to convict bodies and select those con-
sidered worthy of indulgence. Like colonial archives these record groups were
not ‘dead matter’ in the sense that they were shelved and forgotten.8 They

7
  J. Bradley, R. Kippen, H. Maxwell-Stewart, J. McCalman and S. Silcot, ‘Research Note: The Foun-
  ders and Survivors Project’, The History of the Family 15, no. 4 (2010): 470.
8
  A. L. Stoler, Along the Archival Grain: Epistemic Anxieties and Colonial Common Sense (Princeton, NJ:
  Princeton University Press, 2009), 3.

                               Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis          417



remained live records for many years after their creation; some even contain
notes entered in the early twentieth century.
     The point was forcibly impressed on each cohort of fresh arrivals. Mustered in
the yard of the penitentiary or female factory they were informed that henceforth
their wellbeing would depend upon their conduct. While the wicked risked
painful encounters with road and chain gangs, penal stations and female fac-
tories, those that worked hard and without complaint could expect to be recipi-
ents of the state’s largesse.9 In order to translate knowledge into power,
convicts had to believe in the infallibility of the state’s bureaucratic engine.
     Records were used to tie convicts to the interests of the state in other ways too.
Those in hulks awaiting transportation were set to work at tasks such as dredging and
constructing jetties and breakwaters. The value of the labour they performed was
carefully calculated. As a reward for diligent service every convict was entitled to
keep one penny out of each shilling’s worth of work they completed for the govern-
ment. At the end of every week the prisoners received one-third of their accumu-
lated savings while the remainder was left in hand until they were discharged.10
     Many convicts also had opportunities to earn money while under sentence in Aus-
tralia. When they passed the threshold of an institution, cash found on their person was
taken from them and added to any sums already banked on their behalf. As well as
incentivising labour, bank accounts provided a handy reserve from which <U+FB01>nes could
be deducted. Even the value of the labour power of absconded convicts was monetised.
The reward of £2 advertised for the recapture of every male runaway provided the
opportunity for some to make a sizeable deposit into their account. The cost of the
reward, however, was subtracted from the accumulated assets of the absconder.
While physical coercion was used to chastise those who did not bend their will to
state and master, positive inducements were also an important labour extraction tool.
     There has been some criticism of previous attempts to use quantitative tech-
niques to explore Australia’s convict past precisely because of the role that records
played in underpinning state power. There is certainly a danger that mining the
colonial archive might merely succeed in reproducing nineteenth-century domi-
nant views about convicts.11 Convict record series are rich in data precisely
because they functioned as important governmental technologies.12 This is cer-
tainly not an issue that is unique to colonial Australia. All systems of labour
exploitation justify the unequal distribution of power relations on the basis of
the perceived shortcomings or failures said to be characteristic of subaltern popu-
lations.13 A good illustration of this is provided by Governor George Arthur’s


9
   C. Pybus and H. Maxwell-Stewart, American Citizens, British Slaves: Yankee Political Prisoners in an Aus-
   tralian Penal Colony 1839–1850 (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 2002), 76–7.
10
   ‘The Hulks at Woolwich’, Oxford Journal, 29 December 1832.
11
   R. Evans and W. Thorpe, ‘Power, Punishment and Penal Labour: Convict Workers and Moreton Bay’,
   Australian Historical Studies 25, no. 98 (1992): 90–111.
12
   A. Stoler, ‘Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance’, Archival Science 2 (2002): 87–8.
13
   H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘“Like Poor Galley Slaves”: Slavery and Convict Transportation’, in Legacies of
   Slavery: Comparative Perspectives, ed. Marie Suzette Fernandes Dias (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars
   Publishing, 2007), 56–7.

418     Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


comparison of the operation of ‘convictism’ in colonial Australia and plantation
racism in the Caribbean. He argued that, while convicts were not black, ‘they
are criminals, and the master … may draw, from his knowledge of their crimes,
a sanction, quite as satisfactory as that arising from difference of colour, for any
severity he would practice against them’.14 It was record-keeping systems that
disseminated knowledge of convict ‘crimes’, ensuring that any attempt to chal-
lenge the circumstances in which a prisoner found themselves merely increased
the number of damning entries recorded against their name. Any act of protest
thus risked strengthening the bureaucratic shackles that held the convict in place.
     While some have cautioned against the naive use of state archives, others
have questioned the extent to which information that was at least in part elicited
from convicts can be trusted.15 In this sense, the information contained in convict
records might be regarded as the product of a cat and mouse game, where the
state attempted to gather the information that it needed to control and effectively
exploit its charges, whereas the convict tried to conceal and obfuscate as much as
possible.
     State records are problematic in other ways too. Much of the data collected
about transported convicts has a snapshot quality – it represents a particular
moment when that individual was interrogated or otherwise described.16 These
very public encounters tell us little about private life. Those who avoided run-
ins with magistrates’ benches as they negotiated a route to freedom are far less
documented than others who frequently appeared in court. The moments
when a convict was publicly shamed are invariably present in the archive,
while other life achievements went largely undocumented. It is not just convict
history that suffers from this problem. Since most records are generated by
encounters with the state, the individual only enters the archive when a public
intermediary, such as a census enumerator, knocks at the door or in other
ways interrupts the <U+FB02>ow of private life. Yet, this problem is a particular character-
istic of archival series produced by surveillance systems. Convicts may be extra-
ordinarily well documented compared to other lower-order citizens, but a lot of
government-generated paperwork cannot substitute for a convict voice – or at
least not an unproblematic one. It is right to be sceptical about claims that trans-
ported convicts can speak to us, not in words, but out of the dry dust of the stat-
istics used to regulate their lives.17 This does not necessarily mean that they are
rendered mute however.18



14
   George Arthur, Defence of Transportation in Reply to the Remarks of the Archbishop of Dublin in his Second
   Letter to Early Grey by Colonel George Arthur (London: George Cowie, 1835), 18.
15
   Robson, 181–2; Frost, 26.
16
   Alan Atkinson, ‘Writing about Convicts: Our Escape from the One Big Gaol’, Tasmanian Historical
   Studies 6, no. 2 (1999): 24–5.
17
   S. Nicholas and P. Shergold, ‘Convicts as Migrants’, in Convict Workers, ed. Nicholas, 45.
18
   Ian Duf<U+FB01>eld, ‘“Stated This Offence”: High-Density Convict Micro-Narratives’, in Chain Letters: Nar-
   rating Convict Lives, eds L. Frost and H. Maxwell-Stewart (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press,
   2001), 119–35.

                             Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis       419



      All historical data is a product of the cultural, political and social forces that shaped
the creation and subsequent use of record series. Access to a lot of information is
useful, however, in that it can be used to explore those processes in some detail. Quan-
titative approaches can be particularly important in that they can help to <U+FB02>esh out vari-
ations in recording practice. A lot of information is also useful in that it can help to
reconstruct the historical moment in which the record was <U+FB01>rst drawn up.
      On arrival in Van Diemen’s Land convicts were asked to provide details of
their previous conviction history, but were informed that their colonial interroga-
tors already had access to detailed information about their prior lives extracted
from metropolitan gaol and hulk reports. Those detected lying or concealing
information risked punishment. As George Arthur put it:
      The man perceives at once that the of<U+FB01>cer who is examining him does
      know something of his history; and not being quite conscious how much
      of it is known, he reveals, I should think, generally a very fair statement
      of his past life, apprehensive of being detected in stating what is untrue.19
It is possible to collectively test the outcome of encounters between convict and
state. On balance, convicts confessed to more offences than were of<U+FB01>cially
recorded against their name. Over 20 per cent of male convicts with gaol
reports describing them as ‘unknown’ admitted to having been convicted at
least once before.20 The evidence suggests that the state won this particular
tussle, tricking convicts into coughing up details of prior offending of which the
colonial establishment had no prior knowledge. Resort to British criminal
justice record series reveals, however, that they tended to conceal the severity
of former encounters with the law. Serious charges of assault, for example,
were often passed off as ‘rows’ – a description that made them sound as
though the offence was no more than a barroom scuf<U+FB02>e.21
      If convicts were not always forthcoming about the nature of the offence that
they had committed, it is also possible that they attempted to conceal or invent
other details of their past lives. There is a great deal of variation in the manner in
which convict occupations are described in various record groups. Not only are
post-embarkation records more detailed than those compiled in British and Irish
gaols and hulks, they also tend to credit convicts with greater levels of skills.
Whereas 45 per cent of male prisoners housed in two British hulks in the period
1837–43 are recorded as having unskilled occupations, only 26 per cent of male con-
victs convicted in England, Scotland and Wales and landed in Van Diemen’s Land
over the same period confessed to having such low-skilled trades (see Table 1).


19
   Cited by P. R. Eldershaw, Public Records of Tasmania. Section Three. Convict Department (Hobart:
   Archives Of<U+FB01>ce of Tasmania, 2003), 7.
20
   A total of 3,637 male convicts have gaol records that describe them as ‘unknown’. Of these 674 con-
   fessed to having been convicted once before. Tasmanian Archive and Heritage Of<U+FB01>ce (hereafter
   TAHO), Con 31, Conduct Registers of Male Convicts Arriving in the Assignment Period, and Con
   33, Conduct Registers of Male Convicts Arriving in the Period of the Probation System.
21
   H. Rogers, ‘“A Very Fair Statement of His Past Life”: Transported Convicts, Former Lives and Pre-
   vious Offences’, Open Library of Humanities 1, no. 1 (2015): e3, http://doi.org/10.16995/olh.27

420     Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


                    Table 1. Distribution of convict occupations (%).
                                                Hulk         Embarked          Arrived
                    Professional                 1.5             1.2              1.1
                    Semi-professional            1.4             1.3              1.1
                    Skilled                     44.2            44.7             40.0
                    Semi-skilled                 7.8             8.1             32.7
                    Unskilled                   45.1            44.8             26.1
                    N=                         9,353           6,890            11,812

                    Sources: The National Archive (TNA), HO 9, York and Fortitude.


     It is unlikely, however, that convict lying can explain the scale of the discre-
pancy in occupational recording between metropolitan and colonial records.
Indeed, if convicts attempted to conceal information it would be logical for
them to be consistent about the answers that they gave. Inventing an occupation
mid-voyage would seem to be a poor strategy, especially as each transportee was
told that information collected in the hulks had been forwarded with them.
     There are a number of different ways in which it is possible to check the quality
of the occupational information elicited from convicts. There are for example distinct
regional patterns embedded in the data that are consistent with the geography of
employment in nineteenth-century Britain. Over three-quarters of the potters trans-
ported to Van Diemen’s Land were tried in the county of Staffordshire, the centre of
the British pottery industry. The same proportion of button makers were convicted
in Warwickshire, and cotton factory workers in Lancashire and Cheshire. These dis-
tributions are very similar to those reported by Nicholas and Shergold for New South
Wales.22 If convicts systematically lied about the skills they brought to Australia they
did so in ways that matched the regional distribution of occupations in the land from
which they had been deported.
     Many also bore signs on their body that were consistent with their claimed prior
occupation. Well-sinkers and colliers arrived with blue marks on their heads. These
‘miner’s tattoos’ were an occupational hazard – the product of underground cuts that
had been contaminated with dirt and coal dust.23 Others arrived with the signs of
injuries that support occupational claims. Clerks were heavily scarred on their left
hand – all nineteenth-century clerical workers used razor-sharp implements to cut
goose quills.24 A high proportion of cotton spinners had mutilated or broken
<U+FB01>ngers. It was common for cotton factory workers to clean lint and other detritus
from clogged gears, leading to high rates of injury.25

22
   S. Nicholas and P. R. Shergold, ‘Convicts as Workers’, in Convict Workers, ed. Nicholas, 65.
23
   Chris Winder, ‘Occupational Skin Diseases’, in Occupational Toxicology, eds Chris Winder and Neill
   Stacey (London: CRC Press, 2004), 128.
24
   H. Maxwell-Stewart and J. Bradley, ‘“Behold the Man”: Power, Observation and the Tattooed
   Convict’, Australian Studies 12, no. 1 (1997): 81.
25
   Reasons in Favour of Sir Robert Peel’s Bill, for Ameliorating the Condition of Children Employed in Cotton
   Factories (London: W. Clowes, 1819), 61; and J. D. Schmidt, Industrial Violence and the Legal
   Origins of Child Labor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 85.

                             Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis     421



     Rather than the product of lies, variations in the information recorded about
convicts re<U+FB02>ect the different institutional settings in which each record group was
drawn up. The most noticeable difference between the hulk records and the occu-
pational information elicited from convicts on arrival in Australia, for example, is
the relatively small proportion of agricultural workers listed in the hulk registers.
As there was no ready use that could be made of convicts with rural skills in
British dockyards, it made sense to record them as labourers. By contrast agricul-
tural skills were at a premium in the Australian colonies. It was not unusual for
the convicts with experience of farm work to list the range of agricultural tasks
they could perform. The ability to sow, reap, mow, shear, and handle livestock
were all important skills, the possession of which increased the potential utility
of the prisoner.26
     Rather than eliciting information about occupation in order to place an indi-
vidual in the class structure – a common preoccupation of courts – the colonial
state sought to record suf<U+FB01>cient information to ensure that convict labour could
be ef<U+FB01>ciently utilised. This is almost certainly why many convicts listed more
than one occupation. Rather than reporting the trade they had followed most
recently, they provided information about past employment. This helps to
explain why so many female convicts are recorded as domestic servants.27 Dom-
estic service has been called a ‘life-cycle’ occupation.28 It was what most working-
class girls did before graduating to other work such as employment in a factory.
Even if they were not formally employed as servants, many had experience of
tasks such as laundry work.29 Thus, convict records differ from census data in
that they do not record details of employment at the point of arrest, but are
instead abbreviated curricula vitae listing the most important skills a prisoner
brought to the colony. This is why it is rare for no trade to be listed against a con-
vict’s name.
     Not all convicts sentenced to transportation were actually sent; it is thus poss-
ible that those arriving in Australia were not representative of those entering the
hulks – the most skilled being sent to supply labour to the penal colonies.30 Analy-
sis of the hulk registers suggests that occupational selection on these lines was not
routinely practised. Those transported to Bermuda, Gibraltar, New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land had a range of skills that were broadly re<U+FB02>ective of
those entering the hulks. There was a difference in age structure however. Con-
victs who served out their sentence in the British Isles had a mean recorded age of
29.6 on arrival in the hulk, compared to 24.9 for those who were transported.
Convicts who were thought unlikely to survive the voyage were not embarked.
Since morbidity rates were correlated with age, a selection process focused on
<U+FB01>tness tended to favour the young.

26
   See in particular TAHO, Con 27, Appropriation Lists of Convicts.
27
   Oxley, 139–41, 164–6, 236.
28
   P. Laslett, The World We Have Lost (London: Methuen, 1971), 36–7.
29
   A. Fauve-Chamoux, ‘Introduction’, in Domestic Service and the Formation of European Identity, ed.
   Antoinette Fauve-Chamoux (Bern: Peter Lang, 2004), 8.
30
   Oxley, 236.

422    Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


Table 2. Literacy rates for male convicts (%).
                                                    Hulk                            Arrival in VDL
Neither read nor write                               29.53                               16.85
Read only                                            26.88                               26.55
Read and write                                       43.59                               56.60
                                                   100.00                               100.00
N=                                                  9,392                               23,532
Sources: TNA, HO 9, York and Fortitude.


     Men were less literate when they entered the hulks than when disembarked
in Van Diemen’s Land (see Table 2). Yet, this difference should perhaps not be
unexpected in a system that placed great emphasis on schooling. Reading and
writing classes were held in both the hulks and on board convict vessels.31 Lit-
eracy data can also be used as a further check on the integrity of occupational
information. The most literate convicts were those with professional skills, fol-
lowed closely by shopkeepers and dealers. The least literate were labourers,
miners and agricultural workers. Some trades considered to be low-skilled had
fairly high literacy rates, re<U+FB02>ecting the requirements of the job. Errand boys
and messengers, for example, needed to be able to read addresses (see Table 3).
     There are other ways of testing the integrity of literacy data. While average
literacy increased with age, convicts who claimed to be twenty, thirty, forty
and <U+FB01>fty years old were less likely to be able to read and write. This was particu-
larly the case with female convicts and those born in Ireland. There is a well-
established relationship between lower levels of literacy and age rounding. This
can be measured using Whipple’s index.32 The closer a Whipple score is to 100,
the least evidence there is for age heaping within that population. As can be
seen from Table 3, convicts with occupations associated with higher levels of
reported literacy had signi<U+FB01>cantly lower Whipple scores than those with occu-
pations associated with poor literacy rates.
     In summary there is nothing to suggest that convict records are a particularly
inaccurate source of data. Checks on the answers that convicts provided to their
colonial interrogators do not provide evidence of large-scale systematic bias.
Comparisons with hulk data reveal many differences in the recording of infor-
mation about prisoners, but these can be explained by the different contexts in
which the data was captured and the impact of state interventions like compul-
sory schooling.



31
   Rosalind Crone, ‘Attempts to (Re)shape Common Reading Habits: Bible Reading on the Nine-
   teenth-Century Convict Ship’, in A Return to the Common Reader: Print Culture and the Novel, 1850–
   1900, eds Beth Palmer and Adelene Buckland (Farnham: Ashgate, 2011), 103–20.
32
   A Whipple index score is calculated by summing the number of individuals aged 23 and 62 who
   report ages ending in 0 and 5 and then dividing that sum by the total number of individuals
   aged 23 to 62 and multiplying by <U+FB01>ve.

                                Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis             423



Table 3. Literacy and Whipple scores for male convicts reporting different
                              occupations.
Recorded occupation                                         Literacy score                  Whipple index
Professional                                                      4.95                             104
Shopkeepers and dealers                                           4.45                             104
Workers in wood                                                   4.24                             109
Food and drink                                                    4.18                             111
Clothing                                                          4.17                             110
Errand boys, messengers and porters                               4.10                             109
Domestic service                                                  4.02                             120
Military                                                          3.75                             112
Marine transport                                                  3.72                             117
Labourers                                                         3.28                             117
Quarrying and mining                                              3.20                             121
Agricultural workers                                              3.07                             123

N = 26,530.
Literacy scored as 1 = neither read nor write, 2 = read a little, 3 = read only, 4 = read and write a little, 5
= read and write.
Sources: TAHO Con 18 Description Lists of Male Convicts, Con 23 Alphabetical Register of Male
Convicts, and Con 33 Conduct Registers of Male Convicts Arriving in the Period of the Probation
System.


    Quantitative techniques can also be used to read the archive against its grain,
that is, to deploy data in ways that were not originally envisaged by its creators.
The whole purpose of compiling a record of life-course offending was to use the
power of paperwork to control convict labour. When many convict lives are read
in parallel, however, it is the state that is placed in the spotlight. Rather than indi-
vidual failings, the analysis of collective lives reveals the impact of state actions.
Morbidity and mortality rates, the distributions of punishments and rewards,
reconviction and family formation can all be used to explore ways in which trans-
portation policy shaped the collective experience of convicts.
    Detailed mortality data is available for male convicts from the moment they
entered the hulk. The experience of death can be reconstructed for both male and
female convicts from the point where they were embarked on a convict vessel.
Death rates amongst convicts at sea were strikingly low. It was much safer to
travel as a convict to Australia in the <U+FB01>rst half of the nineteenth century than it
was to take a steerage passage across the Atlantic (see Table 4). The risk of
death amongst male convicts was greatest in the hulk. It fell dramatically post-
embarkation, but rose over the course of the four-month voyage to Australia
(excluding deaths from shipwrecks). Arrival in the Antipodes did not bring
immediate relief. Convicts died in greater numbers in the <U+FB01>rst two months on
shore than they did during the last month of the voyage. Thereafter the risk of
death declined to levels that compare favourably with those for nineteenth-
century non-institutionalised populations (see Figure 1). Male convicts under
sentence in Van Diemen’s Land were four times less likely to die than prisoners

424     Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


Table 4. Age-speci<U+FB01>c mortality rates.
                 Transatlantic         Convicts                                    England and
                   migrants              hulk           Convicts at sea               Wales
Age               1836–53a             1837–43            1817–53                   1843–47b
15–24                 2.53               2.63                 2.19                     0.69
25–34                 4.40               3.12                 2.48                     0.82
35–44                 5.07               4.61                 2.58                     1.07
a
 R. L. Cohen, ‘Determinants of Individual Immigrant Mortality on Sailing Ships, 1836–1853’,
Explorations in Economic History 24, no. 4 (1987): 371–91.
b
 Roderick Floud and Bernard Harris, ‘Health, Height, and Welfare: Britain, 1700–1980’, in Health and
Welfare during Industrialization, eds Richard H. Steckel and Roderick Floud (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1997), 98.


undergoing ‘separate treatment’ in Millbank prison, London.33 While female
convicts were at greater risk of death than male convicts at sea, post-disembarka-
tion the relative fortunes of the two populations were reversed.
      Such longitudinal mortality pro<U+FB01>les provide startling evidence of the effec-
tiveness of pre-voyage screening. In an era before germ theory when there was
little understanding of disease vectors, surgeon superintendents and the hulk
administration were nevertheless able to ensure that onshore experience of
death was not transmitted on board transport vessels. Differing outcomes can
be partially explained by the changes in the demands placed on convict bodies
– it was impossible to work convicts at sea in the same way as they were
tasked on land. The variation in age between convicts who were not transported
and those who were embarked for the long voyage to Australia was also signi<U+FB01>-
cant. Table 4 shows that older convicts were at greater risk of mortality, especially
in the hulks. The death rate in port was further lowered through the practice of
discharging sick convicts back onto land.
      The experience of surgeon superintendents on convict vessels helps to
explain why it took so long for miasma theory to lose its appeal. The measures
taken to stop the sources of decaying matter thought to spread disease from enter-
ing convict vessels appeared to work. The constant scrubbing and washing of
bodies, clothes and decks cut rates of infection. It was only when convict
vessels ventured into the southern oceans that mortality rates started to climb
back towards those experienced in hulks. Pitching decks disrupted daily cleaning
routines and increased the rate of accidents, while dwindling supplies of fresh
stores increased the risk of death from scurvy.34


33
   House of Commons. ‘Report from the Surveyor-General on the discipline and management of
   prisons with appendix 1847–53’, British Parliamentary Papers, Crime and Punishment, Prisons, 14
   (Shannon: Irish University Press, 1970), 60–1.
34
   R. Kippen and H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘Morbidity and Mortality on Convict Voyages to Australia’, in
   Lives in Transition: Longitudinal Analysis from Historical Sources, eds P. Baskerville and K. Inwood
   (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press, 2015), 43–70.

                             Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis     425




Figure 1. Death rates in the hulks at sea and during the <U+FB01>rst year in the colony for male and
female convicts arriving on voyages to Van Diemen’s Land, 1830–53.
    Perhaps surprisingly, arrival in Australia provided scant relief. Mortality rates
increased after disembarkation due to a combination of knock-on effects from the
long voyage and exposure to new sources of infection. Newly arrived convicts
were processed in large barracks where they rubbed shoulders with old hands.
Female convicts made a quicker post-voyage adjustment because the labour
demands imposed upon them were physically less demanding and the female
factory was less crowded than the male penitentiary. Within six months the
mean death rate for both male and female convicts had fallen to levels that
were not much greater than those experienced by the same age cohorts in
England and Wales. In fact, the risk of death amongst convicts was less than
that for the soldiers who guarded them.35 This decline coincided with the shift
of the bulk of the convict population from public sector barracks to accommo-
dation provided by the private sector masters to whom they were either assigned,
loaned or hired.
    There is a temptation to read such health outcomes as a sign that the experi-
ence of being transported as a convict was relatively benign. While it is true that
death rates in convict Australia were insigni<U+FB01>cant compared to the experience of
mortality in other penal colonies, this does not mean that the experience of being
transported to Australia was not coercive.36 The reduction in mortality rates at sea


35
   H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘Revisiting Linus Miller’s “Dark Picture of Van Diemen’s Land”’, Australasian
   Canadian Studies 29, nos. 1–2 (2012): 113.
36
   H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘Isles of the Dead: Convict Death Rates in Comparative Perspective’, Historic
   Environment 24, no. 3 (2012): 26–34.

426    Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


was only possible because of the degree of control state of<U+FB01>cials exercised over
their convict charges. It is no accident that mortality rates declined <U+FB01>rst on
vessels used to transport slaves and convicts. Because of their status as unfree pas-
sengers, measures designed to improve hygiene could be imposed upon bonded
workers.37
     Despite the low overall death rates, the variations in health outcomes for con-
victs in Van Diemen’s Land were marked. All convicts who worked in gangs were
at a greater risk of death. This was partially because ganged convicts were accom-
modated in barracks, but it was also because they were coerced in ways that were
uncommon in the private sector. Ganged convicts were punished at a much
higher rate than non-ganged convicts.38 Some forms of punishment seem to
have been particularly pernicious. Kippen and McCalman found evidence that
solitary con<U+FB01>nement exposure shortened life expectancy, although they could
<U+FB01>nd no evidence that <U+FB02>ogging had a similar effect.39
     Oscillations in the overall male convict death rate were correlated with the
number of convicts sentenced to ganged labour. This in turn appears to have
been driven by colonial labour market conditions. It was most advantageous
for masters to employ convict labour when the costs of feeding and clothing an
unfree worker were relatively low compared to the cost of free wages.40 As the
annual maintenance bill rose, the number of convicts sentenced to hard labour
in road and chain gangs by magistrates’ benches also increased.41 The effect
was to shift the costs of maintaining convicts from the private to the public
sector at the points when it became most advantageous to disinvest in unfree
workers.
     The trend exposes an important issue. Conduct records are not the complete
list of all indiscretions, as claimed by some.42 They are instead the product of a
complex set of factors culminating in a decision to prosecute.43 That decision
could be affected by many things including the worth of the convict; thus convicts
with skills that were not in demand in the colonial economy were at a greater risk
of punishment than others. This is why the number of charges brought against
serving prisoners was inversely correlated with colonial wage rates. The easier


37
   R. Haines and R. Shlomowitz, ‘Explaining the Mortality Decline in the Eighteenth-Century British
   Slave Trade’, Economic History Review 53, no. 2 (2000): 273; and J. McDonald and R. Shlomowitz,
   ‘Mortality on Convict Voyages to Australia, 1788–1868’, Social Science History 13, no. 3 (1989): 291.
38
   H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘The Rise and Fall of John Longworth: Work and Punishment in Early Port
   Arthur’, Tasmanian Historical Studies 6, no. 2 (1999): 104–5.
39
   R. Kippen and J. McCalman, ‘Mortality Under and After Sentence of Male Convicts Transported to
   Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania), 1840–1852’, History of the Family 20, no. 3 (2015): 345–65.
40
   Meredith and Oxley.
41
   H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘Convict Labour Extraction and Transportation from Britain and Ireland
   1615–1870’, in Convict Labour: A Global Regime, eds C. Vito and A. Lichtenstein (Leiden: Brill,
   2015), 191–3.
42
   R. Kippen and J. MaCalman, ‘A Test of Character: A Case Study of Male Convicts Transported to
   Van Diemen’s Land, 1826–38’, in Lives in Transition, eds Baskerville and Inwood, 21–2.
43
   See P. King, ‘Decision-Makers and Decision-Making in the English Criminal Law, 1750–1800’, The
   Historical Journal 27, no. 1 (1984): 25–58.

                               Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis          427



it was to get a replacement for a convict worker, the more likely they were to be
charged with an offence.44
     The ability to link convict records to other archival series enables an explora-
tion of post-sentence lives. Some have argued that the emphasis colonial trans-
portation systems placed on punishment through labour extraction helped
former prisoners to integrate into the free economy, resulting in lower offending
rates than those generally characteristic of ex-inmate populations.45 Others are
more sceptical.46 The post-1865 practice of circulating the details of released
offenders in the pages of the Tasmanian Police Gazette has enabled a detailed analy-
sis of those former convicts who failed to desist from offending. The picture that
emerges is complex.
     Former female convicts were less likely to be rearrested than men. This is sig-
ni<U+FB01>cant since they confessed to a worse record of prior offending on arrival in
Australia. On the whole, transportation seems to have been effective at breaking
cycles of female offending. There was a noticeable relationship between stature
and offending amongst male convicts, but not female. Male convicts who were
short compared to others born in the same region of the British Isles were
more likely to be reconvicted subsequent to their release from the convict
system.47
     Other trends are also discernible. There was a relationship between the levels
of punishment received by male convicts under sentence and the probability that
they would subsequently reoffend. Rather than deterring convicts, increasing
severity inhibited their ability to ‘go straight’.48 This is particularly noteworthy
since much of what is recorded in conduct records might be described as ‘status
offending’. This is a term employed by criminologists to describe charges that
can only be brought against an individual as a result of conditions imposed
upon them. Convict movement offences are a good example. It was not possible
to prosecute free workers for being out after hours. As we have already seen, the
level of prosecution for such offences was driven by many factors including the
operation of local labour markets. Despite the trivial nature of such offences, pro-
secution and punishment increased the probability of post-release offending.
     Convicts were at particular risk from charges relating to sexual conduct. This
included childbirth outside of wedlock, although it should be remembered that
marriage amongst female convicts was discouraged in order to ensure the
supply of domestic servants.49 The result was that most convict women did not

44
   Maxwell-Stewart, ‘Convict Labour Extraction’, 189–92.
45
   J. Braithwaite, ‘Crime in the Convict Republic’, The Modern Law Review 64 (2001): 16–17, 19–21.
46
   B. Godfrey and D. J. Cox, ‘“The Last Fleet”: Crime, Reformation, and Punishment in Western Aus-
   tralia after 1868’, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology 41, no. 2 (2008): 236–58.
47
   H. Maxwell-Stewart, K. Inwood and M. Cracknell, ‘Height, Crime and Colonial History’, Law, Crime
   and History 5, no. 1 (2015): 25–42.
48
   R. Kippen and H. Maxwell-Stewart, ‘“What Is a Man That Is a Bolter to Do? I Would Steal the Gov-
   ernor’s Axe Rather Than Starve”: Old Lags and Recidivism in the Tasmanian Penal Colony’, in
   Transnational Penal Cultures, eds J. Campbell and V. Miller (London: Routledge, 2014), 165–83.
49
   K. Reid, Gender, Crime and Empire: Convicts, Settlers and the State in Early Colonial Australia (Manche-
   ster: Manchester University Press, 2007), 123–60.

428    Australian Historical Studies, 47, 2016


embark on colonial family formation until late in their sentence or after the point
they had become free. This appears to have resulted in some peculiar intergenera-
tional effects.
     A comparison of the heights of colonially born offenders recorded in the
descriptions circulated in the Tasmanian Police Gazette in the period after 1865 con-
<U+FB01>rms that the native born were signi<U+FB01>cantly taller than transported convicts – a
product of improved childhood nutrition and a disease environment that was
benign compared to that of those brought up in industrialising Britain. A signi<U+FB01>-
cant number of these colonially born prisoners had one or more parents who had
been a convict. This provides an opportunity to explore the extent to which the
slur of convict transportation was intergenerationally transmitted. The surprise
is that not only are there no indications that the children of convicts were
stunted, but those that could be traced to a convict mother were taller than
average.50
     This statistically signi<U+FB01>cant result is likely to re<U+FB02>ect the way in which state
coercion impacted upon convict family formation. Because the point at which
convict women could fall pregnant without risk of prosecution was delayed by
a sentence, they had low fertility rates compared to other colonial women. As
others have demonstrated, net gains in the height of adult populations were
almost certainly in<U+FB02>uenced by declining family size.51 Smaller families meant
that there were fewer mouths to feed and as a result pay packets went further.
The difference with convict families is that this did not re<U+FB02>ect choice, but the
impact of state policing designed to ensure the supply of convict domestic
servants.
     The purpose of criminal justice record systems was to accumulate suf<U+FB01>cient
information about an individual to control or otherwise in<U+FB02>uence their actions.
This included assembling the necessary data to inform sentencing policy and
the awarding of indulgences. Entries in record series such as the conduct registers
were intended to be read in isolation. It has taken considerable time and effort to
convert cross-sectional samples of these records into machine-readable form so
they can be analysed as a series, rather than as a collection of individual
records. Access to large amounts of sentencing data enables historians to
examine the timing of prosecutions and explore changes in sentencing strategy
in relation to other data series, such as information on prices and wages. The
effect of this is to decentralise the role of the prisoner. In this sense quantitative
analysis provides the opportunity to turn the archive inside out, making the
state the subject of panoptic power.
     By reading such archives in ways not intended by their creators it is possible
to explore the in<U+FB02>uence that factors other than personal failings had on life-
course outcomes. Linking records in order to piece together something of the

50
   K. Inwood, H. Maxwell-Stewart and J. Stankovich, ‘The Prison and the Colonial Family’, History of
   the Family 20, no. 2 (2015): 12–14.
51
   R. E. Bailey, T. J. Hatton and K. Inwood, ‘Health, Height, and the Household at the Turn of the
   Twentieth Century’, The Economic History Review 69, no. 1 (2016): 35–53.

                         Maxwell-Stewart: The state, convicts and longitudinal analysis   429



lives of convicts before and after sentence can further enhance this approach. The
results of this work reveal ways in which state intervention may have bene<U+FB01>ted
prisoners and their families. Health regimes imposed during the voyage to Austra-
lia reduced mortality. There is also evidence that convict transportation helped
some prisoners to cease offending, especially women. Others who attracted the
ire of the colonial administration while under sentence continued to be persons
of interest to police post-release. State policy also appears to have impacted
upon the children of convicts, although there is little evidence that they were dis-
advantaged as a result of the forced migration of their parents. Further research
promises to extend understandings of the complex ways in which penal transpor-
tation helped to shape the lives of the transported and their descendants. While
imprisonment and convict transportation may not be ‘family friendly’ processes,
the datasets generated by linking criminal justice systems promise to shed con-
siderable light on the role of the state in shaping life in colonial Australia and
elsewhere.


Disclosure statement

No potential con<U+FB02>ict of interest was reported by the author.


Funding

This work was supported by the Australian Research Council [grant number
DP140102231], [grant number LP140100783], [grant number LP140100623].


ORCiD

Hamish Maxwell-Stewart      http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7336-0953

Hamish Maxwell-Stewart
University of Tasmania
Email: hamish.maxwellstewart@utas.edu.au

