<U+F0C9> Menu




           STORIES F<U+FFFD>OM THE
              A<U+FFFD>CHIVES
                               Queensland State Archives




            Escape from St Helena Island
                     21 APRIL, 2021 BY QUEENSLAND STATE ARCHIVES




  Sitting isolated, surrounded by the dangers of Moreton Bay, St Helena Island
  Penal Establishment was a forti<U+FFFD>ed prison. Despite this, numerous prisoners
  still attempted to escape.

                                                 One of the greatest escape
                                                 attempts lasted 11 days and
                                                 was carried out by two
                                                 prisoners: Henry Craig and
                                                 David McIntyre. The
                                                 response to their escape was
                                                 unprecedented, with police
                                                 forces across Australia placed
                                                 on high alert.

                                                 In November 1911, Craig and
                                                 McIntyre planned their
                                                 escape. Coordinating to be in
                                                 the hospital on the same
                                                 night, McIntyre had secured
                                                 the tools required for the
                                                 escape from the tailor shop.
                                                 Craig had been gifted three-
                                                 quarters of a cup (six ounces)
                                                 of whisky from Warder
    ITM519924 David McIntyre (top) and           Rawlinson. On the night of 5
    Henry Craig (bottom)                         November, the escape began
                                                 with the whisky being
distributed to other inmates in the hospital.

Using the tools from the tailor shop, Craig and McIntyre chiselled out the door
jamb during the night. They started their escape at 4am. By leaving the door
intact, the alarm was not raised until 5.25am.

On the <U+FFFD>rst day of their escape, Craig and McIntyre moved from the hospital
through the lumberyard, before hiding in the tinsmith’s workshop roof. From 6
to 15 November, Craig and McIntyre remained hidden in the cavity. Food was
secretly delivered by a fellow inmate.

After nightfall on 16 November, Craig and McIntyre left the roof and acquired
tools from the workshops to scale one of the prison gates. Once out, they made
their way to the boathouse where they attempted to move two boats. They

were unsuccessful. After failing to coerce a horse into dragging the smaller
boat to shore, they gave up.




 ITM271423 General record and description   ITM271423 General record and description
        of male prisoners p.512                    of male prisoners p.112


Craig and McIntyre presented themselves back at the stockade on the morning
of 17 November. They had managed to avoid authorities for 11 days without
leaving the island. A formal inquiry into the escape was held. Warder Rawlinson
expressed guilt over the gifting of the whisky. On 28 November 1911, before
the inquiry had concluded and at only 34 years of age, Warder Rawlinson
committed suicide by cutting his throat.

    ITM271614 Warders Defaulters 1882-1931




Building a gaol for Brisbane
By the 1860s, conditions at Brisbane Gaol on the mainland were deteriorating
due to overcrowding. In 1867, prisoners stationed on the hulk Proserpine were
building the St Helena Stockade which was to be Brisbane’s new gaol.
Originally meant as a quarantine station, it was isolated from the mainland; the
island itself was used for farming, its rich, volcanic soil ideal for growing maize,
potatoes and other vegetables. The prisoners were made to learn trades,
supporting the island with numerous exports such as bricks, clothes, rope,
boots and sugar. At the time, St Helena was considered a model high-security
prison.


    ITM328241 Plan of St Helena Island and the key prison buildings, c.1884


See more buildings, plans and photographs from St Helena Island in our album
here.




          About Queensland State Archives

   For more information about Queensland State Archives visit
   www.archives.qld.gov.au.



     <U+F07C> STORIES FROM THE ARCHIVES             <U+F02C> CONVICT, HISTORY, MORETON BAY, OPEN,
                                   QUEENSLAND, ST HELENA




Subscribe to QSA
Email address

