History

St Helena is located in Moreton Bay 5 km from the mouth of the Brisbane River
and about 8km north-east of Manly. The Island has a fascinating history. Its
most significant period was when it functioned as a high-security colonial prison
from 1867.

The overcrowding in Brisbanes gaols resulted in the conversion of the buildings,
originally intended for a quarantine station, into accommodation for prisoners.
Prison labour was used for all activities on the island, from the construction of
buildings and roadways to growing, processing and cooking of food.

The first few years were devoted to construction of the two cell blocks, kitchen,
bakehouse, hospital, underground tanks, stables, boathouse, storehouse, jetty
and Superintendents home. This formed the base of a building program which
continued until the prisons last years.

In 1869, the lime kiln and sugar mill were added. Sugar cane growing and
processing kept the prisoners busy until the workshops were well enough
established to take over as the main source of work on the Island. These trades
included bootmaking, sail-making, tailoring, saddle making, tinsmithing, candle
making, book-binding and carpentry. The long termers were occupied in these
workshops inside the prison stockade and the trustees engaged in animal
husbandry and agriculture.

Some of the buildings were made from beachrock quarried on the island, or from
bricks made on site from clay found at the northern end of the island. Others
were constructed of timber imported from the mainland. Tradesmen employed
as prison warders supervised this work, maintaining a high standard of
workmanship and productivity. While the prison layout and organisation was
based essentially on the English penal system, the prison architecture was
largely a reflection of the late 19th Century trend to a colonial style of
architecture.

The limited area of St Helena Island (166 hectares) and the increasing needs of
the settlement, resulted in extensive clearing of the natural vegetation for
agricultural and other development. The native vegetation was regarded as
having little or no financial value as timber, or aesthetic value as shade or garden
trees.

The Superintendent of the prison had extensive gardens surrounding his house
and, for many years these gardens were considered the best in Queensland, but
they consisted almost entirely of plants introduced into Australia. Crocus and
White Allysum continue to thrive on the Island to this day. The Superintendent
and the warders ran the prison in a highly efficient manner. For most of the
prison’s 65 years; self-sufficiency was a necessity and profit was the product of
that efficiency.

The St Helena Island Penal Establishment, at one stage of its operation, was
considered to be the best prison of its kind in the world. The St Helena island
Penal Establishment had prize Ayreshire dairy cattle that constantly won awards
at the RNA show and the island’s olive groves yielded prize-winning oil at shows
in Italy, the country of their origin. The entire establishment had been kept with
an eye for perfection.

The life of the island rotated around the supervision of prisoners – as seen in the
constant patrols, barred windows and leg irons. This constant regulation of
work, behaviour and movement was the essence of 19th Century prison life.
Although few people ‘swam’ in those days and shark feeding was instigated as a
deterrent, escape was a constant reality. Magistrates recognised the right of each
prisoner to attempt escape and the responsibility of each warder to frustrate it.
Sentries were posted, windows barred and warders were constantly on the alert.

View historic timeline

The St. Helena tramway is considered to have been a most significant
component of the prison establishment; it operated between 1885 and 1932 and
provided the first passenger tramcar service in Queensland. Remaining evidence
includes the tramway embankments, the distinguishable rights of way, the
docking bay in the Stores building, the ‘Kangaroo’ car and the trolley wheels.

Administrative problems, the new social conscience, prison reform, the potential
for a major fire in the aging timber buildings and the lonely isolation of warders
from friends and family led to the prison’s closure in 1932. It had operated very
successfully for 65 years.

Historical significance was not recognised and so, in 1925, demolition of the
buildings began. This work was also done by prisoners and most re-usable
materials were taken to the mainland for distribution to other Government
institutions. The suggestion that St. Helena Island be made a national park was
mooted as early as 1910 by the then Mayor of Brisbane. The island was the first
historic site to be managed by the Department of Environment and Conservation
for its historic values.

Today, approximately 7% only of the original structures remain and these are
mostly the ones that were built from beachrock or brick. Restoration costs would
be prohibitive so preservation of the remaining structures is the order of the day.

