Place Details

Send Feedback



St Helena Island National Park Historic Area, St Helena Island, Moreton Bay,
QLD, Australia

Photographs




List                      Register of the National Estate (Non-statutory archive)
Class                     Historic
Legal Status              Registered (21/03/1978)


Place ID                  8394
Place File No             4/01/094/0001

Statement of Significance
St Helena Island is significant for its association with the settlement and subsequent development of the Moreton
Bay region through its use as a quarantine station in 1865 and penal complex from 1866 to 1932 (Criterion A.4).
The surviving remnants of the complex provide important evidence of prison design and practice of the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries as well as building methods, landscape and garden design of this period (Criterion
B.2). Aesthetically, St Helena Island is significant for the scenic qualities of its man modified environment and for
its visual contribution to the landscape of Moreton Bay (Criterion E.1).
Official Values Not Available
Description
St Helena Island is located in Moreton Bay near the mouth of the Brisbane River. Prior to European settlement
Aboriginals periodically visited the island from the mainland to gather foods including fruit bat and dugong.
Matthew Flinders made the first European sighting of the island in 1799. With the increasing number of
immigrants arriving at Moreton Bay after the opening up of the area to free settlement, a quarantine station was
proclaimed at Dunwich on North Stradbroke Island in 1850. By the 1860s an alternate site was sought and in 1865
it was decided to develop St Helena Island for such purposes. The construction work was carried out by prisoners
from the hulk, Proserpine, anchored at the mouth of the Brisbane River, the prisoners being confined here to
relieve the overcrowding in Brisbane's gaol. By the end of 1866 it was decided to convert the new institution to a
penal establishment and the first prisoners were confined here in may 1867. With the growth of the population and
the increase in the number of prisoners, additions were made to the original buildings, and eventually St Helena
became the principal prison in the state with accommodation for 300 prisoners. The limited area of St Helena
Island and the increasing needs of the settlement resulted in the conversion of the natural environment into a
manicured landscape of gardens, agricultural plots and grassed paddocks. Sitting within this landscape were
collections of timber, brick and beachrock buildings to accommodate prisoners and wardens, workshops,
agricultural buildings and stores. For many years different trades were carried out on the island including
bootmaking, carpentry, cloth making, baking and blacksmithing. Sugar cane was grown quite extensively during the
early years and a mill for crushing was erected on the island. Difficulties in managing an island prison,
deterioration of structures and changing attitudes to penology led to the downgrading of The penal establishment to
a prison farm in 1921 and to eventual closure in 1933 when the remaining prisoners were relocated to Boggo Road
Gaol in South Brisbane. When the penal settlement closed, the island was handed over to the Brisbane City Council
and was briefly promoted as a pleasure resort (1933-34). This venture did not prosper and the island was
subsequently leased for agricultural and pastoral purposes until its declaration as a National Park in 1979. In 1980
it was further declared an historic area, the first in Queensland. Grazing leases were finally resumed in 1985.
Although many of the prison buildings have not survived, there is still much evidence remaining to show what the
penal establishment was like. The island, and the historical documents pertaining to it, have been extensively
surveyed in recent years, principally by the Queensland National Parks and Wildlife Service.

History Not Available
Condition and Integrity
The conservation of St Helena Island, and its development as a National Park, has been undertaken as a major
bicentennial project by the Queensland Government funding for management planning and physical conservation
works has been provided through the Commonwealth government's bicentennial grants program and the National
Estate Grants program.
Location
About 75.1ha, St Helena Island, 8km north-east of Manly in Moreton Bay, comprising National Park 3004.
Bibliography
ALLOM, R : ST HELENA ISLAND STRATEGIC PLAN (1983)

QLD NATIONAL PARKS AND WILDLIFE SERVICE : DRAFT MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES

FOR ST HELENA ISLAND NATIONAL PARK (JANUARY 1982)

HOGAN, JANET : BUILDING OF QUEENSLAND'S HERITAGE (NATIONAL TRUST OF

QUEENSLAND, RICHMOND, VIC, 1978)

HORTON, H : ISLANDS OF MOREWTON BAY (BODARONG PUBLICATIONS, BRISBANE,

1983)

ALLOM LOVELL MARQUIS-KYLE : ST HELENA ISLAND : MEASURMENT AND

ASSESSMENT OF STRUCTURES : FINAL REPORT (1989)

HARMON-PRICE, P : HISTORY OF ST HELENA ISLAND (QLD NATIONAL PARKS AND

WILDLIFE SERVICE, 1981)


                                                                Report Produced Sat Oct 29 09:00:20 2022


                         Accessibility | Disclaimer | Privacy | © Commonwealth of Australia

