  W E LC O M E         LO C AT I O N          GROVE      P R O C E S S I N G FAC I L I T Y

 QUALITY & SAFETY                 OUR RANGE             EXTRA VIRGIN OLIVE OIL


                 C O M PA N Y P R O F I L E      NEWS        C O N TAC T




The                                                      Raw versus
                                                         cured?
remarkable                                               The olive itself is quite simply the
                                                         fruit of the olive tree. But unlike

story of the                                             most fruits, the olive is never
                                                         eaten in its raw state. The high


Helena                                                   percentage of glucosides
                                                         naturally found in the raw olive
                                                         makes it incredibly bitter. Anyone
                                                         who has tasted a fresh olive will
                                                         testify to its bitterness. For the
     Australia's first                                   olive to become edible, the
International Agriculture                                bitterness must be drawn from

         Winner!                                         the olive, through curing.

  est. Queensland's St Helena Island
St Helena Island, Moreton Bay, being a self-
funded penal settlement, had a commercial
grove of olive trees in the early 1900's.
                                                      Did you know?
 Prisoners had to grow their own food and sell
produce to purchase goods and equipment.              The colour of an olive indicates
 Remarkably, one of their most popular products       the stage of ripeness at which it
was their locally grown and processed olive oil,      was picked. Green olives are
being exported directly to Italy.                     olives picked before they are
                                                      ripe. They should have a firm
St Helena Penal Establishment was proclaimed
                                                      texture and nutty flavor. What we
in May 1867 and was a high security prison for
                                                      refer to as "black" olives actually
long-term inmates until the 1920s, when it was
                                                      light brown, to shades of red and
decided to wind down the prison. It then
                                                      purple, all to way to deepest
functioned as a prison farm until it closed in
                                                      black. As a general rule, the
December 1932.
                                                      darker the olive, the riper it was
In fact there is a Helena Olive Tree variety that     when it was picked.
has been preserved from the penal settlement
                                                      The exception to this rule is the
and is said to be very similar to a Frantoio. It is
                                                      canned "black-ripe" olive. These
believed that its olives won Australia's first
                                                      olives are picked green, then
international agricultural award. Today, olive
                                                      pumped with oxygen to turn
trees still fruit on St Helena Island.
                                                      them black, their new colour
                                                      fixed with ferrous gluconate.
                                                      Since they have virtually no taste,
                                                      it is impossible to put them in the
                                                      same class as you would any
                                                      other olive.

Recently in 2013, a local Brisbane resident,
Trisha Anderson, discovered this watercolour
wrapped up in plastic and towels hidden in a
wardrobe of her Hendra home. Her grandfather,
William Gall, was a comptroller of the
Queensland prisons in the late 19th and early
20th centuries. One of his jobs was to regularly
travel to and inspect St Helena Island...the
painting was presented to him when he retired
in the early 1920's. She later learned that this is
the only painting of St Helena Island in
existence. This rare treasure was donated to the
Museum of Brisbane and is claimed to be one of
the most exciting finds in the last 10 years by
local historians. It was painted by 33 year old
inmate, Charles Winn in 1878.

St Helena Olive – Now
here is a plant with both
a wonderful story and
exceptional fruit.
Now here is plant with a rich and interesting
history. The original Helena Olive was planted in
the late 1800’s on St Helena Island, located off
the coast of Brisbane in Moreton Bay. This island
operated as a high security prison from 1867 to
the 1920’s, and is today a heritage National
Park. The original olive made its way from
Europe to the Island, via a magistrate, and has
continued to thrive in the testing Moreton Bay
environment.

Today, this plant is a 3rd generation heritage
tree, which not only offers a wonderful story, but
also exceptional fruit and award winning olive
oil. The Helena Olive will fruit in the South East
Queensland climate, which for an olive is
impressive in itself. Suitable for in the garden or
on the patio in a pot, the Helena Olive is a
beautiful looking tree that will add a little bit of
Queensland history to your garden.

It is also worth noting that 5 cents from every
plant sold goes to Queensland Parks and
Wildlife to ensure the ongoing preservation of
the historic structures on St Helena Island.

Photograph Noel Burdette:

A new cultivar that has grown in popularity in
recent years under the name of “St Helena” as
seen a dramatic increase in the use of these
trees in our backyards .

Having been originally grown on St
HelenaIsland in MoretonBay for over the past
100 years, it has truly proved itself to be an
outstanding performer for our climate. So
successful was this original grove planted out by
the warden of the prison on the island at the
time that the fruit was shipped back to Italy!

Now we can all own a little piece of this heritage
listed grove by planting our own “St Helena”
olive in our own backyards.




Sources: Australian Olive Gower, 1997; St
Helena Island Education Centre; Brisbane Times
Dec 10, 2013; Bush Garden Nursery 2012; Noel

