ST. HELENA - The Telegraph 23 July 1919

http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article174654669

ST. HELENA

Perhaps one of the greatest incon-

gruities that strikes the visitor to our

city and its surroundings is that St.

Helena, one of the most beautiful and

fertile islands in Moreton Bay, should

be utilised only for the purpose of a

penal establishment. Except in the

cost of transferring the prisoners to

a main land gaol, we cannot see any

valid reason for continuing to use the

island for its present purpose. On the

other hand, as the Home Secretary

himself admits, there is greater cost in

the maintenance of an island prison

because of the cost of transport and

loss of time for officials and other

travelling- to and from the place, — to

say nothing of inconvenience to mar-

ried members of the prison staff. It

is understood that the Cotnptrollcr-

General of Prisons (Major A. T. Peir-

son) is in favour of transferring the

prison to the mainland. On the point

of expense, Mr. Huxham points out

that at present most of the buildings

on the island are in a dilapidated and

dangerous condition and the cost of a

new island prison would be about

£120,000 as against only half that sum

for the construction of a mainland

prison. Though Mr. Huxham does not

hold out much hope of his being able

to make the change in the near future,

it is something to have the Government

recognising that the island has for too

long been withheld from becoming

what it is so manifestly fit to be, — the

leading pleasure resort of the people

of Brisbane. The wonderful fertility

of the island would enable it to be

transformed into a perfect garden. On

the question of the use to which the

island might be put, there is no occa-

sion for haste. Mr. Huxham favours

leasing the island to some person or

company for use as a pleasure resort,

for he is afraid that if the island were

left to the care of the general public, it

soon would be overrun with weeds.

Some time ago, a deputation of boat-

ing men asked that the Island should

be converted into a pleasure resort,

and we have not the slightest doubt

that the boating men would soon rid

Mr. Huxham of his fears about the

weeds, and we have Green Island as a

good example of what enterprise can

do on a pretty island of Moreton Bay.

Incidentally to the statement about the

future of St. Helena, the Home Sec-

retary spoke generally about our

prison system. The public, we think,

will agree with him in the view that

imprisonment should be reformative

rather than punitive. In that

view, Major Peirson is wholly

with the Home Secretary, and,

what is more to the point — as

is well known — he is zealous for

putting the principle into practice with

all those who are so unfortunate as to

be imprisoned in the gaols under his

control. The Home Secretary's

anxiety is for a site offering adequate

scope for the carrying on of healthy

out-door activities, such as farming,

gardening, quarrying, and the like; he

is a thorough believer in the open-air

treatment of prisoners, and dry stat-

istics justify his faith in that treat-

ment as assisting greatly in the re-

formation of prisoners. It has been

found that by healthy occupation, by

implanting in prisoners the belief that

tlio community, far from reveng-

ing itself on them, earnestly desires

that they should no longer be offenders

against the law, the road to reforma-

tion is opened wide, and that the

favourable turn in the whole life of

an offender, many a time has come

when he has been in prison subjected

to an enlightened reformative influ-

ence. In all countries where this more

enlightened method of dealing with

prisoners has been tried, an" unmis-

takably great diminution in crimes

and other offences against the law has

been the result.

