       Read Today's          Tributes &
                                                12:25pm Friday, October 28th, 2022        Rewards
          Paper               Notices




 Brisbane Today             21 °/ 32 °                                                               Hi, Trudy




My        Local       QLD    National       World       Opinion       Business       Entertainment   Lifestyle   Sport
News


 News             Queensland

 Way We Were: St Helena Island’s history
 stained with brutality, madness and
 painful death
 Today it’s a National Park but this island has a brutal past in which many men cut their
 own fingers o<U+FFFD>, writes Dot Whittington.

 Dorothy Whittington
       3 min read February 14, 2021 - 12:00AM    The Sunday Mail (Qld)                                 15 comments




 Warders pose outside the St Helena Island prison, at the mouth of the Brisbane River, in 1893. Picture: State
 Library of Queensland

QLD News
Don't miss out on the headlines from QLD News. Followed categories will be added to My News.



 Follow




More than two decades after the Moreton Bay penal settlement closed to convicts,
a pretty little island in the bay became the new hell on earth for law-breakers.

St Helena opened in 1867 as Queensland’s <U+FB01>rst penal establishment for long-term
male prisoners.

A quarantine station had been built there a year earlier, but it was soon realised it
would be put to better use housing prisoners from the crowded cells at Petrie
Terrace who were spilling into the hulk Proserpine moored at the Brisbane River
mouth.

Over the next 65 years, St Helena con<U+FB01>ned 7500 hardy souls and was the scene of
some brutal business.




St Helena Island’s prison tailor shop with disgraced prisoners forced to avert their faces. Picture: Courtesy of the
John Oxley Library


And, as one correspondent put it, attention paid to the physical or moral diseases

of prisoners was slight: “The ruf<U+FB01>an hoary-headed with crime and villainy of every
description is allowed to herd with the lad sent here for a, perhaps, venial
offence.”

The very worst and nameless of vices were rampant among them so that many a
young man came out with his criminal education complete.

Prisoners had no name, only the number allocated on arrival. For many years,
they were forbidden to speak. A hasty word or even an ugly look could earn a
<U+FB02>ogging.

The maximum was 50 lashes, but this had to be done in two sessions as 25 was
enough to see skin become bone and end at the in<U+FB01>rmary.

But even this was preferable to solitary con<U+FB01>nement, sealed below ground in a
metre-wide cell with a dirt <U+FB02>oor that turned to mud when it rained, to sleep on. It
was pitch black and silent.




A prisoner stands by prison cell doors on St Helena Island. Picture: Courtesy of the John Oxley Library


An 1878 correspondent said it might be imagined that solitary con<U+FB01>nement would
be favourable to sleep and thought, but the reverse was the case.

“From what I can learn, their time in solitude is spent in contemplating a series of

“From what I can learn, their time in solitude is spent in contemplating a series of
horrible mental phantasmagoria”; and 28 days was enough for at least one
prisoner to lose his mind.

St Helena was good business for the government though, as various pro<U+FB01>table
industries were established using the abundant free labour. There were
carpenters, bricklayers and masons, quarrymen, shoemakers, saddlers, tinsmiths,
and labourers. Ironically, the island’s tailors made the Queensland police
uniforms.

Prisoners quarried stone and built a 400m pier. They also built Queensland’s <U+FB01>rst
tramway to carry produce and people from the stockade and workshops to the
wharf at the end of the pier. Four-wheeled trolleys were at <U+FB01>rst hauled by
prisoners, and later by horses.

Sugar cane was planted and a mill built in 1869; and coral was collected for a
limekiln producing cement for construction.




Day trippers explore the old convict settlement on St Helena Island. Picture: News Corp Australia


Sugar production wasn’t entirely successful as it was feared escapees could easily
hide in the cane but then a new lark was discovered. A prisoner who cut off his
<U+FB01>nger on a knife while harvesting cane was given lighter duties. This led to a
spate of similar “accidents” and a collection of St Helena <U+FB01>ngers.

Escapes were rare, any attempt considered “a gratuitous self-in<U+FB02>iction of
punishment”.

Warders watched every movement from sentry boxes above the four corners of
the stockade and even if an escapee did make it out, they had to survive swarms
of mosquitoes in the mangroves around the island before tackling the strong
currents and shark-infested waters for more than 5km to the mainland.

While a former prisoner wrote in 1886 of a lad convicted for horse-stealing
successfully paddling a washing tub to the mainland, history records only one
successful escape. Gunman Charles Leslie had accomplices waiting in a motor
boat offshore early one morning in 1924.

Production dropped away during World War I when prisoners were returned to
the mainland to cover for young men shipped off to the battle<U+FB01>elds.




St Helena Island’s graves are a reminder of the island's penal past. Picture: Supplied


During the 1920s, with only a few prisoners remaining, the good citizens of
Brisbane bemoaned the use of a picturesque island as a jail and began calling for
Brisbane City Council to take control and turn it into a pleasure resort for the
people.

It <U+FB01>nally closed in 1932 when, during the great Depression, it simply became
unviable.

There were some grand plans for its future, including a golf course and rabbit
hunting, but in the end, it was leased as a cattle farm, and was a dairy in the
1950s.

Finally, in 1979, St Helena was declared a historic national park where visitors
can today wander through the ruins of the infamous prison grounds.

Only 56 of the incarcerated remain on the island, buried in graves with a number
on the headstone because, without a name, they will forever remain prisoners of
St Helena.




                         Join the conversation (15 comments)




More related stories

Sport

WATCH: Emotional scenes as Leah Kilner rides for <U+FB01>rst time since fall
There have been many emotional racing moments in 2022 but perhaps few more so than when
Leah Kilner rode again for the first time since her shocking race fall. See the video.




Police & Courts

‘Speak her name’: Family, friends, strangers to unite in vigil for Emily
Candles will be lit, poems read and tears undoubtedly shed this Saturday evening as dusk settles
over the Strathpine park where Emily Thompson’s short but beautiful life was cut short.




Good Afternoon Trudy Recommended based on what you've read




UPDATED QLD Weather News         Fraser Coast                     Bundaberg

5cm hail, wind, rain             Why school wants to              Council report reveals
smash SEQ in face of             send students home               massive pay packets of

smash SEQ in face of     send students home         massive pay packets of
‘supercellular’ threat   early one day a week       top bureaucrats




                                     Most commented

                                     ‘Humiliated in front of nation’: PM
                                     accused of bullying Qld female MP

                                       216




                                     Grim warning over power price woes

                                       119




                                     If renewables are so cheap why are prices
                                     going up?

                                       110




                                     Premier has no one to blame without ‘evil
                                     Tories’

                                       60




                                     Roosters in contract battle for 120kg
                                     teenage monster

                                       45

Membership        About Us          Contact Us        Our News          Our Partners Our Apps
                                                      Network
Subscription      About us          Help & support                      Buy Search Sell
packages                                              Herald Sun        Classifieds
                 Meet the team   FAQs
Group/Corporate                                    The Daily            Find Your Local
                 Job             Letter to the
subscriptions                                      Telegraph
                 opportunities   Editor                                 Foxsports
The Courier Mail                                   The Advertiser
                 Code of conduct Photo Sales                            Foxtel
app
                 Subscription    Advertise with us news.com.au          Hipages
Today's Paper
                 FAQs                              The Australian       Kayo
Newsletters
                 Subscription                      The Mercury          My Tributes
Rewards          terms
                                                   Geelong              odds.com.au
                 Financial                         Advertiser
                 Hardship Policy                                        Punters
                                                   The Cairns Post
                                                                        racenet.com.au
                                                      Gold Coast
                                                      Bulletin          realestate.com.au

                                                      Townsville        Sky News
                                                      Bulletin
                                                                        Coupons
                                                      The Chronicle
                                                                        Brain Gains
                                                      NT News
                                                      The Weekly
                                                      Times
                                                      CODE Sports




A NOTE ABOUT RELEVANT ADVERTISING: We collect information about the content (including ads) you use across this
site and use it to make both advertising and content more relevant to you on our network and other sites. Find out
more about our policy and your choices, including how to opt-out.Sometimes our articles will try to help you find the
right product at the right price. We may receive payment from third parties for publishing this content or when you
make a purchase through the links on our sites.

Nationwide News Pty Ltd © 2022. All times AEST (GMT +10). Powered by WordPress.com VIP
Privacy policy      Relevant ads opt-out        Cookie policy         Terms of use

