       History Australia




       ISSN: 1449-0854 (Print) 1833-4881 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raha20




Intersections in colonial and penal politics: The
case of Queensland in the 1870s

Kerry Wimshurst

To cite this article: Kerry Wimshurst (2012) Intersections in colonial and penal politics: The case of
Queensland in the 1870s, History Australia, 9:2, 135-156, DOI: 10.1080/14490854.2012.11668421

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/14490854.2012.11668421




        Published online: 08 Feb 2016.



        Submit your article to this journal



        Article views: 58



        View related articles




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=raha20

                  Intersections in colonial and penal politics




 Intersections in colonial and penal
               politics
        The case of Queensland in the 1870s

                         Kerry Wimshurst

In 1870 female prisoners from Brisbane were relocated to Toowoomba,
principal town on the Darling Downs. The move angered townspeople
who suspected that political reprisal was the motive for imposing
the ‘terrible women’ on them. In fact, the relocation was primarily
an attempt to solve longstanding problems related to prison labour,
and especially the control of male labour. The movement of prisoners
provides a penological perspective on social and economic conflicts that
were played out at regional and metropolitan levels. There has been
little written about penal politics in Australia in the second half of the
nineteenth century. This article explores the political intersections
that determined the evolution of one penal regime, but the issues are
of perennial significance to the field of penal studies. The study points
to the importance of investigating public reaction to prison policy and
exploring political, economic and social particularities in correctional
history.

This article has been peer-reviewed.


  Mr POWER: He believed if the Government attempted to carry out
  such a scheme, it would lead to the colony becoming a republic. If they
  imported such females, they ought to keep them in Brisbane. He believed
  there were as many good and virtuous people in Toowoomba as in any
  town in the colony, and the Government were not justified in the course
  they adopted of forcing such immoral characters upon them.

                          Toowoomba Chronicle, 10 December 1870, 3.



                                     135

                      History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


On the evening of 5 December 1870, a meeting was held in Toowoomba
to protest against the action of the colonial government ‘in making
Toowoomba a receiving house of the female outcasts of the metropolitan
city’. The mayor noted his regret that the protest had not begun sooner,
because already a few women prisoners consigned from the city had
arrived at the local gaol.1
  The townspeople’s hostility at first seems puzzling, because in the
early 1860s they had welcomed the building of the gaol to house local
men and women.2 In 1860 Toowoomba was one of the first assize
towns established outside Brisbane to hear the cases of ‘all criminals
committed by the various Benches throughout the whole of the immense
southern and western districts’. Judge Lutwyche of the Supreme Court
was instrumental in promoting plans for a gaol in the town. A gaol
meant that prisoners from the region, while on remand and waiting for
their cases to be heard, would not have to be escorted back and forth to
Brisbane ‘at heavy outlay and considerable risk’. If housed locally, it was
hoped, they might be employed on roads and public works. Lutwyche had
condemned the moral turpitude of the young colony, and the building of a
gaol signalled the uprightness of the town in the face of such criticisms.3
Although early reports pointed to defects in materials and design, there
was little opposition in the early 1860s to the gaol itself.4 Completed in
1864, it symbolised for Toowoomba’s citizens the growing prosperity
of their town, which with a population of about 4600 was seeking to
establish itself as the major service centre for the pastoral and farming
interests on the Darling Downs.5
  The anger of the townspeople in 1870 was sparked because female
prisoners were now to be forwarded ‘exclusively’ to their gaol, while local
men would be sent to the capital. The townspeople had been taken by
surprise. Only one month before the protest meeting the liberal-leaning
member for Toowoomba, William Henry Groom, wrote to the Premier
and Colonial Secretary Arthur Hunter Palmer, noting that ‘considerable
feeling prevailed’ about the ‘alleged’ transfer of prisoners, and asking
for clarification.6 The reply from the Colonial Secretary’s office was the

1   Darling Downs Gazette, 7 December 1870, 3; Toowoomba Chronicle, 10 December 1870, 3.
2   Toowoomba Chronicle, 26 September 1861, 2; Darling Downs Gazette, 16 June 1864, 3.
3   ‘The Black Assize’, Darling Downs Gazette, 21 July 1864, 2.
4   Toowoomba Chronicle, 26 September 1861, 2.
5   D B Waterson Squatter, Selector, and Storekeeper: A History of the Darling Downs 1859–
    93, Sydney: Sydney University Press 1968; Maurice French Pubs, Ploughs & ‘Peculiar
    People’: Towns, Farms and Social Life, Toowoomba: University of Southern Queensland
    Press 1992.
6   Toowoomba Chronicle, 12 November 1870, 3.

                                          136

                         Intersections in colonial and penal politics


first public confirmation that the movement of prisoners would go ahead.
Initially, it seemed that town concern was about the removal of local men.
By the time of the protest meeting, however, attention had shifted to the
character of the incoming women who would ‘necessarily resort to crimes
of the most demoralising character to obtain a livelihood’, once released
upon the town.7
   Studies of the official punishment of women in the late nineteenth
century have argued that their incarceration was concerned as much
with the control of refractory women as the control of crime. Penal
strategies for inculcating acceptable womanly behaviours and punishing
criminality varied from place to place, but had common disciplinary
objectives. For example, penal approaches to the rehabilitation of
criminal women in the United Kingdom were based increasingly on
therapeutic and medical models compatible with the emergence of the
liberal welfare state. Such ‘progressive’ views placed less emphasis on
traditional notions of the inherent evil of female offenders, but produced
an increasing array of institutions for restraining and treating ‘deviant’
women.8 Similarly, reformatories in the United States of America, while
intended for ‘saving’ young women, were also characterised by coercive
practices premised on respectable views about normal and abnormal
womanhood.9
   In Australia penal strategies for governing deviance and criminality
were also developing, to the apparent disadvantage of women compared
with men. In New South Wales, John Ramsland has argued, ‘women were
not as well cared for as men’ in gaols, and ‘degradation was worse for
women than men’.10 Similarly, Peter Lynn and George Armstrong suggest
that in Victoria ‘females were worse off as discharged prisoners, just as
they were as prisoners’. There was no permanent accommodation for
women until the late 1890s, and they were ‘frequently moved about in



7    Female prisoners convicted in Brisbane, and undergoing sentence in Toowoomba
     (Petition), Queensland, Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly (hereafter QVP),
     third session of 1870, 259.
8    Lucia Zedner Women, Crime and Custody in Victorian England, Oxford: Clarendon Press
     1991; Russell P Dobash, R Emerson Dobash and Sue Gutteridge The Imprisonment of
     Women, Oxford: Basil Blackwell 1986.
9    Mara L Dodge Whores and Thieves of the Worst Kind: A Study of Women, Crime, and
     Punishment, DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press 2002; Estelle Freedman Their
     Sisters’ Keepers: Women’s Prison Reform in America, 1830–1930, Ann Arbor: University of
     Michigan Press 1981; Nicole Hahn Rafter Partial Justice: Women in State Prisons, 1800–
     1935, Boston: Northeastern University Press 1985.
10   John Ramsland With Just But Relentless Discipline: A Social History of Corrective Services in
     New South Wales, Sydney: Kangaroo Press 1996, 90, 163.

                                              137

                       History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


different types of accommodation’.11 The reasons for such neglect are not
explored in depth in the histories of corrective services in these states,
although it seems clear that women remained an afterthought in penal
policy. The only major study in Queensland concludes that the control of
wayward women was an important objective of women’s incarceration,
but again it is not clear why women should have been removed from the
metropolis, Brisbane, in 1870 to what contemporaries judged an inferior
country gaol.12
   This article argues that the gendered relationships produced by the
emerging penal system were reciprocal relationships of control. That
is, arrangements made for the control of male or female prisoners
necessarily affected the other sex as well. The management of women
thus depended on disciplinary and fiscal considerations relating to the
control of male prisoners. This is not to deny that colonial Queensland
developed criminal justice and public health systems aimed at the
sexual control of marginalised women. For example, two years before
the Toowoomba move the Contagious Diseases Act (1868) was introduced
in Queensland, making it one of the few places in the world where such
legislation applied across the colony and not just to locations with military
personnel. A woman suspected of prostitution might be compelled by the
police to submit to medical examination. Signs of venereal disease would
lead to three months confinement in the lock hospital; non-compliance
or absconding incurred a prison sentence. The legislation was aimed at
controlling the growing number of prostitutes in Brisbane and regional
ports.13 It is likely that the removal of ‘fallen women’ from the metropolis
was supported by respectable urbanites aspiring to ‘civilised’ ways in the
new self-governing (but economically struggling) colony, a colony that
had emerged from a convict past barely a generation earlier.14
   Control of non-conforming and criminal women was certainly a
concern for colonial authorities, but the primary impetus for rearranging


11   Peter Lynn and George Armstrong From Pentonville to Pentridge: A History of Prisons in
     Victoria, Melbourne: State Library of Victoria 1996, 96, 111–114.
12   John McGuire, Punishment and Colonial Society: A History of Penal Change in
     Queensland, 1859–1930s, PhD thesis, University of Queensland 2002, chapter 3.
13   Mark Finnane and Stephen Garton ‘The work of policing: social relations and the
     criminal justice system in Queensland 1880–1914, Part 2’, Labour History 63, 1992, 43–
     64: Raymond Evans ‘“Soiled doves”: prostitution in colonial Queensland’, in Kay Daniels
     (ed) So Much Hard Work: Women and Prostitution in Australian History, Sydney: Fontana
     1984, 127–161; Alana Piper ‘Great expectations: efforts to entice women to Queensland
     from 1860 to 1900’, Queensland History Journal 20 (8), 2008, 370–390.
14   Raymond Evans ‘The hidden colonists: deviance and social control in colonial
     Queensland’, in Jill Roe (ed) Social Policy in Australia: Some Perspectives 1901–1975,
     Sydney: Cassell Australia 1976, 74–100.

                                           138

                       Intersections in colonial and penal politics


the gaol system in the 1870s was the control of the far larger number of
male prisoners and their labour power. Two interwoven themes emerge
from my study: on the one hand the place of female offenders in the gaol
system and moralistic judgements imposed on them, and on the other
contemporary concerns about the functions of prison labour.
  The establishment of Toowoomba women’s gaol also provides a pen­
ological lens on vehement regional and metropolitan contests. Toowoomba
had developed a liberal political reputation by the 1870s. Groom, the local
member, was the owner of the Toowoomba Chronicle and the spokesperson
for the ‘radical agrarians’, an alliance of farmers, town shopkeepers and
artisans who advocated land reform on the Darling Downs. He was also
a prime mover behind the protest meeting and resulting petition against
the incoming women. The town’s relationship with squatter-dominated
government was already problematic. The imposition of ‘female outcasts’
from the metropolis aggravated tensions because locals saw it as an
insult. The townspeople ‘believed that the wrong had been intentionally
inflicted upon them, and that it was the desire of the Government to
degrade and humiliate the residents of Toowoomba as much as they
possibly could’.15 Citizens in the early 1860s could envisage potential
benefits from having a ‘general’ gaol in their town, but a decade later they
could see only disadvantages arising from its conversion to a women’s
gaol.
  This study does not focus on the characteristics and conditions of the
women themselves, but upon the swirl of colonial and penal politics that
surrounded – and impelled – their removal from the metropolis. The
article is divided into two parts reflecting the two themes. The first section
explores the opposition of Toowoomba residents, since their protest was
the first indication of the impending changes to penal arrangements.
The upheaval over the coming of the ‘terrible women’ was underpinned
by competing social and economic aspirations in the fledgling colony.
In fact these political tensions, exacerbated by divisions of class and
gender, were particularly evident at the local level. The second section
investigates the attempt by government and penal authorities to harness
the labour of prisoners in the interests of economy and control. At the
level of government, women prisoners were invisible.16 Their condition

15   Darling Downs Gazette, 7 December 1870, 3.
16   Kay Saunders and Raymond Evans ‘Visibility problems: concepts of gender in Australian
     historical discourse’, Australian Historical Studies 27 (106), 1996, 142–153; Trevor
     McClaughlin ‘“I was nowhere else”: casualties of colonisation in eastern Australia in
     the second half of the nineteenth century’, in Trevor McClaughlin (ed) Irish Women in
     Colonial Australia, Sydney: Allen & Unwin 1998, 142–162.

                                          139

                       History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


was rarely considered comprehensively except in terms of providing
a potential solution to the labour/disciplinary problem in the male
system. In this sense, gendered penal relationships and conditions were
reciprocal. Moreover, despite the aggravations between regional and
central interests, and their different interpretations for the removal of
city women to Toowoomba, attitudes to this small group were similarly
ambivalent at all levels. They were seen both as deviants to be controlled
and unfortunates to be protected. On reflection, such contrary views
are not surprising because they indicate the persistence of that ‘fear
and fascination of the “other” embodied in convict women’.17 Competing
views and expressions of respectability and deviance, and contrasting
conceptions about different types of male and female identities, informed
a social order emerging from the recent convict past.


The ‘female outcasts’ and colonial politics
A range of sentiments emerged during the protest meeting in December
1870, including disgust at female offenders, desire to protect family and
even pity for the unfortunates about to be imposed on the town. Some
protestors wanted to form vigilante committees to ensure that women
left town on the expiration of their sentences. Others expressed concern
for the women’s welfare and wanted to establish a fund to assist those
deserving of assistance. Nevertheless, the mood remained angry at
what was seen as the government’s insult. The comments of a local hotel
keeper, Mr Grigg, indicated other underlying anxieties. Grigg suggested
strongly that the imposition of the women on their town might be an act
of political reprisal.
     He would like to remark that the people of Toowoomba sometimes
     acted foolishly, and did things they ought not to do. Did they not
     burn the effigies of Messrs Palmer and Mackenzie on a former
     occasion, and were they not now being paid off for it? Did they not
     also condemn the action of the Government in refusing to allow
     immoral characters to travel by the railway, and which was no
     doubt remembered?18

  The first incident recalled the visit in February 1868 by the Duke of
Edinburgh, Prince Albert, second son of Queen Victoria. The Prince
paused briefly in the town and was then whisked off to Jondaryan station

17   Joy Damousi Depraved and Disorderly: Female Convicts, Sexuality and Gender in Colonial
     Australia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1997, 58.
18   Toowoomba Chronicle, 10 December 1870, 3.

                                           140

                        Intersections in colonial and penal politics


for an evening with the squatters.19 During the short stopover, the Prince
had been introduced to the conservative member for the Western Downs,
but not to the more liberal mayor and town councillors.20 The local press
raged against the slur cast upon the municipality and townspeople. A
mock trial was held of the Premier, Robert Mackenzie, and the Colonial
Secretary, Arthur Palmer, in effigy. Mackenzie was lampooned as in­
decisive and weak and his effigy was dressed as an elderly woman, Mother
Mackenzie. Palmer, who had accompanied the Prince to the Downs and
would become Premier in 1870, was portrayed as a vindictive and arrogant
northern squatter, especially unfriendly to the ‘liberal’ municipality of
Toowoomba. According to reports, though ‘somewhere not far short of
two thousand persons took part in the affair’, the crowd was orderly and
police intervention was not required. Both conservative politicians were
convicted of incompetence and insulting the town, and their effigies were
burnt.21
  The second of Grigg’s ‘foolish acts’ would have been still fresh in the
minds of the protestors, and was especially germane to their current
concerns. In June 1870 Helen McKay was prevented from catching a
train from Toowoomba to Allora, a neighbouring town. The ticketing
clerk claimed he had instructions from William Walsh, the Secretary of
Public Works responsible for railways in Palmer’s government, not to
allow immoral women on trains. One report claimed only that she was
not permitted to travel first-class, but otherwise could have travelled.
Another said that her luggage had already been forwarded, leaving
McKay stranded in Toowoomba.22 All reports noted that she was well-
behaved at the station. McKay sued the Department of Railways. No
documents were produced at the trial confirming that such instructions
had been promulgated. The press assumed she was a prostitute and
took to calling her the ‘girl in blue’, but the court disallowed any
questions about her supposed immorality, and she was awarded £50 in
compensation.
  The civil trial was held in Toowoomba and the four jurymen were
portrayed, perhaps tongue-in-cheek, as ‘gallant’ locals coming to the
assistance of a distressed woman on her way to be married. McKay’s
counsel saw the episode as a democratic struggle against a conservative

19   Darling Downs Gazette, 27 February 1868, 2; Maurice French (ed) Travellers in a Landscape:
     Visitors’ Impressions of the Darling Downs 1827–1954, Toowoomba: University of Southern
     Queensland Press 1994, 181–183.
20   Toowoomba Chronicle, 26 February 1868, 2.
21   Darling Downs Gazette, 29 February 1868, 3; Toowoomba Chronicle, 29 February 1868, 3.
22   Toowoomba Chronicle, 31 August 1870, 3; Darling Downs Gazette, 31 August 1870, 3.

                                            141

                       History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


government bent on dictating Toowoomba’s morals. The Brisbane press
picked up the story and, clearly aware of the irony, satirised the government
for ‘planning revenge on a virtuous community’ by sending the ‘colony’s
immoral women’ to this region of ‘Arcadian simplicity’.23 Walsh was
accused of planning ‘a terrible revenge on the people of Toowoomba for
the sympathy they had manifested’ for McKay. It was reported that he
was ‘striving to persuade Palmer to make the Toowoomba Gaol a female
prison’.
   The citizens of Toowoomba, whom Duncan Waterson describes as ‘one
of the great urban bourgeois success stories of Queensland’,24 certainly
felt that ‘this serious injury [had been] undeservedly inflicted on them’
as political payback. The petition that emerged from the protest did not
specifically mention this suspicion, but it did note that the local gaol
was ‘no suitable asylum or reformatory’ for such women, and that the
results would be regrettable for the ‘Colony at large’.25 The petition mainly
decried the characters of the women who, it was claimed, would be let
loose on the town.26
   The ‘good burghers’ were not simply morally offended by the
anticipated influx of criminal women. Inflaming their suspicions were
deeper economic anxieties. The colony was in the grip of economic
depression (1866–71), which ‘shook the nascent colonial order to its
core’.27 While economic crisis set the backdrop for a pervasive sense of
insecurity, the ongoing dispute over land reform was a more focused
concern for Darling Downs inhabitants. Struggle over land reform
characterised most Australian colonies, but competition was especially
fierce on the Downs, one of the few regions in Queensland where soil
and climate suited closer settlement, where as Ross Fitzgerald observes,
‘agricultural land was richest and squatter monopolies strongest’.28
Townspeople and farmers supported land reform and opposed the
pastoralists whose interests dominated the cabinets of Mackenzie
and Palmer. The Crown Lands Alienation Act (1868) introduced by the
Mackenzie government was unpopular with smaller selectors, who
believed it benefited the squatters by allowing them to retain control
of large tracts of prime land they already leased from sympathetic

23   Brisbane Courier, 11 November 1870, 2; The Queenslander, 12 November 1870, 3.
24   Waterson Squatter, Selector, and Storekeeper, 80
25   QVP, third session, 1870 (petition), 259.
26   QVP, third session, 1870 (petition), 259.
27   Raymond Evans A History of Queensland, New York: Cambridge University Press 2007,
     85–87.
28   Ross Fitzgerald From the Dreaming to 1915: A History of Queensland, Brisbane: University
     of Queensland Press 1982, 187.

                                           142

                        Intersections in colonial and penal politics


conservative administrations.29 The Toowoomba Chronicle criticised
what it saw as the conservative intent of the 1868 legislation, fearing
that ‘it [was] far more likely to increase the number of large than small
free holders, or in other words, that it [would] prove to be a capitalists’
rather than a peoples’ Bill’. 30 On the other hand, a meeting attended
by representatives from the ‘leading stations’ on the Downs indicated
that pastoralists were also dissatisfied with the complexities of the
legislation, lack of compensation and the accusations of deviousness
levelled against them by liberal opponents in parliament and press. 31
These were the economic and class antagonisms boiling away at the
time Palmer’s government decided to relocate Brisbane women to the
Toowoomba Gaol.
  Fitzgerald suggests that ‘When the political power of the “Pure
Merinos” was finally broken, it was the storekeepers combining with
selectors who were largely responsible, aided by powerful business
oriented politicians.’32 This coalition of shopkeepers and farmers
was represented prominently on the protest petition. Of the 178
signatures, 156 (88 per cent) were decipherable. 33 Table 1 summarises
the occupations for 106 (68 per cent) of those identified, and the bases
on which 135 (87 per cent) were eligible to vote in the Legislative
Assembly. Enfranchisement was restricted to males and was based
on property qualifications, principally ‘ownership of freehold of the
value of £100 or occupancy of property which had an annual value of
£10’. 34 Petitioners did not need to be voters, just ‘humble’ residents, but
farmers, storekeepers and tradespersons predominated. A comparison
of petitioners with voters registered in the Toowoomba district shows
the protestors were representative of the majority who owned or rented
property. These protestors were moderately successful citizens who
were able to vote, and were affluent enough to advertise in the post
office directories. They identified their futures with the maintenance
of a law-abiding region, and defending their interests in the face of
a squatter-dominated government that, to them, wanted to impose
immoral women on the town.


29   S H Roberts History of Australian Land Settlement, 1788–1920, London: Frank Cass and
     Co. 1969, 259–268.
30   Toowoomba Chronicle, 25 April 1868, 2
31   Darling Downs Gazette, 9 April 1870, 2.
32   Fitzgerald From the Dreaming to 1915, 187.
33   The manuscript with signatures is housed in the Queensland Parliamentary Library.
34   R D Lumb The Constitutions of the Australian States, Brisbane: University of Queensland
     Press 1977, 20.

                                           143

                        History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


 Occupational groups        Petitioners No.    Petitioners %
 Storekeepers, publicans           29                27.4
 farmers                           26                24.5
 tradespersons                     23                21.7
 carters and carriers              11                10.4
 others*                           17                16.0
 total                            106                100
 Basis of franchise         Petitioners No. Petitioners %        Toowoomba electorate %
 freehold                          77                57.0                  67.7****
 household                         30                22.2                    14.0
 resident**                        13                9.6                     12.4
 salary***                         9                 6.7                     2.2
 leasehold                         6                 4.4                     3.7
 total                            135                100                     100
* clerk, auctioneer, overseer, bushman, stockman, clergy, labourer; ** from 1875 roll only
*** from 1871 roll only; **** Toowoomba electoral district, registered voters n=2185.

Table 1. Occupations (n=106/156) and basis of voting eligibility
(n=135/156) of signatories to the 1870 protest petition.
Sources: Queensland Post Office Directories (1868, 1874); Queensland Electoral Rolls
(1870–71, 1875).


  In addition, there was clear evidence of contrasting and competing
conceptions of manhood aroused by the threat that the incoming women
and their potential liaisons with lower class males posed for respectable
masculinity. It has been claimed that storekeepers and selectors ‘mentally
exchanged mateship for respectability’ and got ‘the best of the bargain’
over mobile rural and town workers.35 One of the first comments made at
the 1870 protest (and made by a shopkeeper) was the remark that some
categories of men, especially bush workers, many of whom remained
unmarried because of the colonial gender imbalance, might welcome the
disreputable women:
         Perhaps the Government considered they were doing Toowoomba
         a favour by their proceedings in the matter – they might probably
         think there would be a lot of lusty young fellows who would
         shortly have done shearing and washing, and were desirous of
         providing them with consorts – but their action in the matter was
         not appreciated. Perhaps drapers ought not to grumble, for such
         females were generally good customers of theirs.36

35   Waterson Squatter, Selector, and Storekeeper, 107; Clive Moore ‘Colonial manhood and
     masculinities’, Journal of Australian Studies, 56, 1998, 35–50.
36   Toowoomba Chronicle, 10 December 1870, 3.

                                              144

                       Intersections in colonial and penal politics


   Significantly, no similar remarks were reported for the remainder of the
meeting. There was no indication that townswomen spoke at the meeting
or signed the petition, and perhaps their presence was not considered
appropriate to the matter at hand. The protestors, as male heads of
household, were concerned for the welfare of their families, a point made
by a number of speakers. While the petition claimed that the incoming
women were ‘propagators of vice’, the citizens did not see themselves
as vindictive. Some speakers were concerned about the welfare of the
women, and they didn’t want to hear suggestions (even jokingly) that
these ‘unfortunates’ might be sexually used by rural workers from the
pastoral runs, or commercially exploited by some shopkeepers. The
protest meeting in 1870 reflected the anxieties and milieu of an aspiring
petite bourgeois formation confronted by the arrival of déclassé women.
Toowoomba’s resistance to the women may have reflected a fear of
metropolitan evils in general, but these shopkeepers and small farmers
were most concerned about criminality and the perceived threat of moral
contamination presented by the women and their associates.
   The petitioners claimed to be in no doubt about the character of the
incoming women and were concerned that they would be ‘discharged
without the means of providing for themselves return passages to
Brisbane, nor even the common necessities of life’.37 Perhaps the
townspeople really did know what to expect because they already had
local exemplars. The incoming women and their offences were very similar
to the few local women already incarcerated in Toowoomba Gaol. The only
significant differences were that the majority were charged with offences
in Brisbane and that sentences involving ‘hard labour’ were increasingly
imposed. Otherwise, characteristics of the incomers were similar to the
local (female) gaol population who preceded them. Indeed, the boundaries
between offences were sometimes vague: vagrancy might cover a range of
circumstances from prostitution to drunkenness to destitution.38 Much
depended on how assiduously the authorities were policing working-class
lives at any particular time.
   Comparing Toowoomba Gaol’s female population in 1866–70 (n=56)
with that of 1875–77 (n=249), more of the Brisbane women used an
alias (9 per cent) compared with the country women (2 per cent) but the
difference was not significant. The majority were convicted of vagrancy
(34 per cent), drunkenness (14 per cent), larceny (14 per cent) and obscene
language (12 per cent). Few were convicted of serious offences against the

37   QVP, third session, 1870 (petition), 259
38   Finnane and Garton ‘The work of policing’, 47–48.

                                           145

                       History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


person such as assault (4 per cent). The mean sentence (14 weeks) and
the mean age (33 years) remained consistent over the decade spanning
the transfer of women to Toowoomba. A large proportion had arrived in
the colony from Ireland (48 per cent) followed by England/Wales (25 per
cent) and Scotland (13 per cent).
   While many of the arrivals at the gaol were Irish women, there is little
evidence that ethnic or religious bigotry informed the townspeople’s
protest.39 Toowoomba had a large Irish-born population, 30 per cent
according to the 1881 census, and 33 per cent of the Downs population
were Roman Catholic.40 There was less sectarian strife on the Downs than
in the capital, and Queensland in general was said to be an ‘intensely
Irish’ environment.41 Nor were concerns expressed about any other racial
or ethnic group that might be relocated to the town. The main factor
inflaming tensions between the town and colonial government was not
the ethnic backgrounds of the women, but their disreputable character.
   Acrimony between the town and Palmer’s administration continued
until the change of government in 1874. The local member, Groom, writing
a year after the first women arrived, complained of female ‘innocents’
who remained in Toowoomba to carry on their trade. He cited the
‘abomination’ of Rebecca W who ‘took cottages in different localities and
carried on a system of infamy, enticing young females whose acquaintance
she had formed in the gaol to reside with her’. He said more would be ‘let
loose to pollute the town’ since there were ‘sixteen such women currently
in the gaol’.42 The governor of Toowoomba Gaol, Henry Blaney, responded
that the accusations were a ‘tissue of falsehoods from beginning to end’.
Rebecca W had been supplied with a pass to get her back to Brisbane, but
had committed offences along the way in Ipswich and was sentenced to
return to Toowoomba. He concluded: ‘There is [sic] none of those Brisbane
prostitutes to my knowledge in Toowoomba with the exception of four or
five and they are in service and conducting themselves well.’43
   Groom made one further attempt in 1874 after the change of government
to have the Brisbane women removed. The report of his ‘quiet endeavours’
was conciliatory in tone, speaking of those incarcerated as ‘unfortunates’

39   Libby Connors and Bernadette Turner ‘“I cannot do any more”: resistance, respectability
     and ruin – recapturing the Irish orphan girls in the Moreton Bay districts’, in Trevor
     McClaughlin (ed) Irish Women in Colonial Australia, 105–122.
40   Waterson Squatter, Selector, and Storekeeper, 259–262.
41   Patrick O’Farrell The Irish in Australia: 1788 to the Present, Sydney: University of New
     South Wales Press 2000, 132–133, 144.
42   Darling Downs Gazette, 25 October 1871, 3.
43   Letterbook of Toowoomba Gaol, series 635, item 515999, 26 November 1871, 161,
     Queensland State Archives (QSA), Runcorn (hereafter Letterbook of Toowoomba Gaol).

                                           146

                        Intersections in colonial and penal politics


and noting that the imposition of these women had been a ‘sore point
for some time’.44 The government agreed to consider the matter, but it
was unlikely that policy would be reversed as extensions had been made
to accommodate additional women in the gaol.45 Critics of Toowoomba
Gaol increasingly drew attention to the institution’s inability to effect
rehabilitation and to defects in its construction and flood-prone location,
rather than directing attacks on the characters of the women within.46
When Groom and the Colonial Secretary (R M Stewart) visited the Gaol in
1876 they were pleased with the cleanliness of the place, and undertook to
ensure the Colonial Storekeeper supplied sewing machines and materials
sufficient for the women to work.47 Production of institutional clothing,
considered medium labour, might assist government coffers and distract
the women from ‘comparing notes about the past and arranging mischief
for the future’.


Penal politics
Toowoomba citizens thought the women had been transferred to their
town in an act of political revenge. Such an act would not be out of
character for William Henry Walsh, that ‘Demon of discord’ who has
been described by his biographers as ‘gauche, nasty, devious, highly
egocentric’ and ‘probably one of the most hated men of his time’.48 Yet
Walsh was also a ‘creditable administrator’,49 and it seems likely that,
as Secretary for Public Works in 1870, he advised the new Palmer
government of potential ways to tackle penal problems that had occupied
previous administrations. Palmer himself would have been well aware of
these problems. As Colonial Secretary and Secretary for Public Works in
Mackenzie’s government (1867–68) he had responsibility for the conduct
of public institutions and infrastructure.
  There were two closely related problems. First, what to do with ‘idle’
prisoners who, by contemporary accounts, constituted most of the prison
population: this was really a question about the efficacy of prison labour.
The second was an allied question about the future of St Helena, a penal


44   Toowoomba Chronicle, 21 March 1874, 3; Darling Downs Gazette, 21 March 1874, 2.
45   Gaols of the Colony, Sheriff’s Report, QVP 1873, vol 1, 1289.
46   Letterbook of Toowoomba Gaol, 15 July 1876, 362.
47   Ibid, 10 November 1876, 373.
48   D Denholm and H J Gibney ‘Walsh, William Henry (1823–1880)’, Australian Dictionary
     of Biography, vol 6, Melbourne: Melbourne University Press 1976. Available from: http://
     www.adb.online.anu.edu.au/biogs/A060373b.htm.
49   Ibid.

                                            147

                       History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


island recently established off the coast, close to the capital. The reports
of two select committees (1868–69) show how both concerns meshed,
and how attempted solutions to these questions led almost inevitably to
transferring Brisbane women to Toowoomba.
   The report on prison discipline (1868) heard that there was insufficient
labour to occupy prisoners at Brisbane Gaol, which then contained about
140 males and 35 females. The select committee was told that during this
period of deep economic depression, the state made considerable outlay
just to keep ‘reckless’ prisoners in idleness. The lack of provisions for
carrying out hard labour sentences made prison attractive to the ‘felon
class’.50 Brisbane Gaol was over-crowded, according to Sheriff Halloran,
which meant prisoners could not be classified properly to separate
recidivists from those who might be reformed.51 While the major concern
was for control of the larger number of men, the Visiting Justice to
Brisbane Gaol (L A Bernays) testified that a similar situation existed for
women, most said to be prostitutes, who were ‘indifferent to gaol’. He
agreed that if materials were supplied, then these women could produce
garments for other government institutions, but with little to do, ‘the
impression on the mind of a visitor would probably be that they look well
fed, sleek and perfectly contented with their position’.52
   The problem of prisoner ‘idleness’ had seemed insoluble. However,
potential solutions began to suggest themselves. St Helena had
commenced as a penal establishment in May 1867 and was described as
‘experimental’.53 Some longer term male prisoners were employed on the
island in small-scale agriculture and land clearance, but there had always
been uncertainty about the type of prisoner to be sent to St Helena,
‘trustworthy’ men or the worst long term cases.
   Decisions were made quickly. The dire condition of colonial finances,
combined with concerns for maintaining discipline, settled the future
of the penal system for the next fifty years. The government hoped that
St Helena could become self-sustaining and perhaps profitable. A range
of trades and workshops would be introduced, and for this able-bodied
men, preferably with skills, were required. By the time of the report on St
Helena (1869), the government’s view was that St Helena should become
the premier penal establishment for men. Brisbane Gaol would process

50   Report of the Select Committee on Prison Discipline (hereafter SCPD) QVP, 1868, vol 1,
     1087–1161.
51   SCPD, Halloran’s evidence, 1107–1110.
52   SCPD, Bernays’s evidence, 1112–1114.
53   Report from the Select Committee on the Penal Establishment at St Helena (hereafter
     SCSH) QVP, 1869, vol 1, 859–904.

                                           148

                       Intersections in colonial and penal politics


able-bodied men who would no longer be kept in regional gaols.54 Rather,
after classification and observation in Brisbane, these men would be
forwarded to St Helena. However, since Brisbane Gaol was overcrowded,
the women incarcerated there would need to be removed and housed
elsewhere – but where?
  It is clear that Sheriff Halloran, who was responsible for gaols, did not
fully comprehend government thinking and the direction of penological
events as they unfolded 1868–70. As late as 1869, Halloran wanted a
‘temporary’ and ‘inexpensive’ wooden structure built for the women and
attached to Brisbane Gaol. He thought this structure adequate for the
women because most of them were short term prisoners. He estimated
the cost of the building and fence at £250. 55 Yet he also argued that
‘as many hard labour men as possible’ should be sent to Toowoomba,
once local female prisoners were moved into a new ward, as yet not
approved for construction. In effect, he wanted room at Brisbane Gaol
for more men, with the women hived off into a wooden shelter, but he
also wanted more male prisoners housed at Toowoomba, to raise its
status above that of a country ‘house of detention for short periods’.
His thinking was expansionist, but his strategy was misjudged. The
chairperson of the St Helena inquiry was Arthur Palmer, whose effigy
had been recently burnt at Toowoomba and who was now sitting on the
opposition benches. Soon, as Colonial Secretary and Premier, he would
be making decisions about the relocation of male and female prisoners
in the colony.
  What must have tipped the scales against the sheriff’s plans was that
Toowoomba increasingly appeared unsuitable for the males already
there, but adequate for additional women. The gaol was secure, but
difficult to guard, more suited to short term prisoners. There was little
in the way of productive labour to occupy male prisoners, since economic
depression left little call for gaol-manufactured items in the locality.
Even gaol authorities agreed that the institution ‘could not be called a
reformatory prison, quite the reverse’. The earlier inquiry on prison
discipline (1868) was told that young males were worse when they came
out of Toowoomba, because the men were not occupied and they spent
their time ‘contaminating the minds of each other’.56



54   Letterbook of the Sheriff Containing Letters to Heads of Departments (1865–71) series
     15170, item 89488, 17 April 1869, 218, QSA.
55   SCSH, 895–896.
56   SCPD, 1155–1159.

                                          149

                     History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


   However, the government’s decision to move women to Toowoomba,
and remove most of the men, was still made with haste. Little thought
was given to what the women would do once transferred. The uncertainty
applied both to how the women would be occupied and their welfare once
released. The first female turnkey who arrived in December 1870 (shortly
before the protest meeting) noted ‘the need for suitable work to be set
afoot’ to prevent the increasing number of unoccupied women from
quarrelling.57 The gaoler asked what to do about the first women coming
up for release who wanted to return to Brisbane.58 The sheriff provided a
‘limited number’ of signed passes so the women could progress by train to
Ipswich and then riverboat to Brisbane. Gaoler Blaney gave these passes
to the ‘most incorrigible’, presumably to get them out of Toowoomba. The
Colonial Secretary (Palmer) concurred that only the ‘worst characters’
should get a pass and that ‘it was not his intention to send the whole of
them back’ to Brisbane as he hoped they would seek employment locally
on the Downs. His advice was to discharge the incorrigibles entitled to
a pass a day early, because then authorities could compel them to leave
town by train.59
   The government’s vision that at least some of these city women might
settle into domesticity on the Downs perhaps explains the ambivalence
in Sheriff Halloran’s comments about the transfer. He held little hope for
these women, and seemed uncertain whether the move was for the good
of the women themselves. If the women were to be rehabilitated then
why, he implied, send them to a country municipality where they might
be even more stigmatised:
     The females are almost wholly of a class degraded by drink, and by
     its associate vices, and are seldom clear of gaol, beyond three or
     four weeks at a time. In a comparatively small population like that
     of Queensland, women of this description become locally known,
     and lose their self-respect, more determinately than in countries
     where an offender, removed from the place of her fall to one where
     she will hardly be recognised, can be better benefited by decent and
     moral associations.60

  Many of these women, of course, did stand out and became identified
locally as troublesome. The visiting magistrate insisted that Elizabeth C
be sent back to Brisbane rather than released into the town. This was the

57   Letterbook of Toowoomba Gaol, 5 December 1870, 102; 7 January 1871, 105.
58   Ibid, 27 January 1871, 108.
59   Ibid, 28 March 1871, 123.
60   Report on the Prevention and Repression of Crime, Including Penal and Reformatory
     Treatment in Queensland, QVP 1872, vol 1, 1488.

                                        150

                       Intersections in colonial and penal politics


third time she had been sent down from Brisbane, convicted of wilful and
malicious damage and vagrancy, and there had been ‘several complaints
made against her by inhabitants of the town’.61 In addition, local police
were accused of harassing the women after their release, including
informing potential employers about the women’s backgrounds. 62
  There were problems providing prison work for the women because
of a longstanding rift with the Colonial Storekeeper who provided
material with which the women produced garments. Blaney pointed to
the difficulties of filling a regular quota, either because of fluctuating
numbers of prisoners, or because insufficient material had been sent
to the gaol.63 The Storekeeper complained of slovenly work. Blaney
responded that while the women were closely supervised, making serge
clothing was beyond many of them as such work required ‘tailors and
people brought up in the business’.64 The supply of sewing machines in
the mid-1870s caused further argument, with the gaoler complaining
the machines broke down, and it seems that initially the Storekeeper
was opposed to the use of machines because he could not supply enough
material.65 Yet, despite accusations of their worthlessness and lack of
domestic and sewing skills, the women fulfilled work expectations when
possible. The sheriff was moved to acknowledge:
     The value of work performed by the female prisoners, after paying
     for material, is three hundred and thirty-six pounds, nine shillings
     and five pence. Considering the degraded and useless class of
     women to be dealt with in this prison, this result is very satisfactory.
     Against some of these women upwards of fifty convictions are on
     record, in fact the Gaol appears to be considered their home. Many
     of them are unable to sew even the coarsest work.66

  The tension between storekeeper and gaoler again highlighted the
ongoing problem of delineating clearly the purposes of prison work.
McGuire’s study of penality in Queensland argues that the fiscal crisis
of the state was the most powerful incentive to achieve economies in
the system in the late nineteenth century.67 It is certainly the case that


61   Letterbook of Toowoomba Gaol, 10 July 1871, 147.
62   Darling Downs Gazette, 21 December 1872, 2. For other instances of tensions between
     the gaol and police, see Darling Downs Gazette, 9 November 1872, 3; Letterbook of
     Toowoomba Gaol, 18 December 1872, 215; 14 July 1875, 324.
63   Letterbook of Toowoomba Gaol, 7 September 1871, 157; 17 November 1873, 255; 9 May
     1876, 356.
64   Ibid, 3 January 1877, 382–383.
65   Ibid, 10 November 1876, 374; 16 November 1876, 376; 3 January 1877, 383.
66   QVP, 1877, vol 1, 1026.
67   McGuire Punishment and Colonial Society, chapter 7.

                                          151

                      History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


gaols and prisons were expected to pay as much of their way as possible,
especially in a ‘mortgaged economy’ such as Queensland’s, but there were
other functions of labour. In fact, the question of prison labour was central
to penal politics in the late nineteenth century. While the government
was especially concerned with fiscal aspects, penal administrators were
also cognisant of the control function of labour and argued strongly that
prison labour should retain a balance of objectives.
  Penal officials kept reminding the government that there was more
to prison labour than just economic considerations. Contemporary
discourse about prison labour ranged across three core concerns: labour
for productive work and economic reimbursement to the state, labour that
was reformative of character and, third, what was referred to as ‘penal
labour’, hard, repetitive and disciplinary. Prior to moving the women
to Toowoomba and reorganising male accommodation, provisions
for achieving any of these objectives were lacking. Sheriff Halloran
was adamant about the need to ‘balance profitable labour against the
punishment of penal labour’ and insisted that penal labour should never
‘be sacrificed to the immediate concerns of profit’.68 In fact, the sheriff
and likeminded officials frequently quoted from British government
documents produced 20 years earlier at a time when, following the
cessation of transportation, officialdom was starting to question the
mid-century emphasis on the reformatory mission of the new British
prisons and to advocate a harder line on discipline.69 In the case of male
prisoners, Halloran said the disciplinary ‘pain’ of penal labour should
always be a legitimate consideration: ‘The great want in all the gaols is
means of employing the prisoners in a profitable manner, and the still
more effectual punishment of penal labour.’ In the year he retired,
Halloran referred to the question of labour as ‘a matter of great difficulty
and perplexity’.70
  Other colonies were attempting also to grapple with the twin problems
of prison labour and prison discipline. In Victoria, for example, prisons
made greater use of solitary confinement and punishment cells to impose
discipline. Thus, the system moved slowly toward a policy that emphasised
prison labour as reformative and character building, rather than mainly
punitive.71 On the other hand, lack of space in Queensland, because of

68   QVP, 1885, vol 1, 538.
69   Prison Discipline (Despatch Respecting).’ QVP, 1869, 263–264; Neil Davie ‘“Business
     as usual?” Britain’s first women’s convict prison, Brixton 1853–1869’, Crimes and
     Misdemeanours 4 (1), 2010, 37–52.
70   QVP, 1888, vol 1, 903.
71   Lynn and Armstrong From Pentonville to Pentridge, 91–104, 110–113.

                                         152

                       Intersections in colonial and penal politics


the disinclination of governments to invest in facilities, meant that there
could only be limited recourse to solitary confinement, and hence the
insistence of Halloran and other prison officers on the importance of
prison work for penal and disciplinary purposes. Moreover, prison life
in Queensland tended to be lived in association with other prisoners, a
mode of accommodation said to be conducive to moral contamination.
Paradoxically, while some progressive penologists were decrying
the ‘evils’ of associated accommodation, others were pointing to the
deleterious effect on the mental health of prisoners when kept isolated
for long periods in single cells.72
   The problem of labour remained intractable. The Board of Inquiry (1887)
reported that prisoners on St Helena were productively engaged, albeit in
a narrow range of agricultural and industrial pursuits, and the women at
Toowoomba appeared to be usefully occupied, but opportunities for labour
at other regional gaols and Brisbane Gaol were sporadic or non-existent.73
A persistent problem was that work intended to impart useful skills had
to be provided by the gaol system rather than found outside. Prison
officials had always hoped that municipalities might employ prisoners on
public works, but governments were anxious to avoid ‘interfering with
free labour’, particularly during times of economic depression and public
unrest, so little eventuated. Prison authorities continued to advocate
the disciplinary role of punitive labour, but governments and official
inquiries increasingly distanced themselves from the concept of ‘purely
penal labour’, which produced ‘resentment, obstinacy, and hardness in
the labourer’. Penal labour as punishment came to be seen by progressive
commentators and liberal governments as ‘torture in disguise [and]
totally non-reformatory in its effect’.74
   In the case of women, there was always less emphasis on the ‘pains’
of penal labour. Official views of women mirrored those mixed views
expressed by the Toowoomba protestors in 1870. Distaste for dealing
with this most ‘degraded and difficult class’, mingled with sympathy for
the ‘unfortunate class’ of women.75 While most agreed that there was
little hope of rehabilitating these women, they still might be protected
from themselves and each other, and useful work provided the key.
Women prisoners were never to be used in hard manual labour, either

72   Ibid, 101–102.
73   Report with Minutes of Evidence taken before the Board of Inquiry appointed to Inquire
     into the General Management of Gaols, Penal Establishments, and Lockups of the Colony
     of Queensland, QVP, 1887, vol 1.
74   Ibid, xviii–xix.
75   QVP, 1879, vol 1, 743.

                                           153

                      History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


inside or outside of the gaol, but this left them with a very narrow range
of useful work, which might also be disrupted by events external to
the correctional system. In the early 1890s the Colonial Storekeeper
complained that the superintendent of Toowoomba was trying to dictate
the amount of goods and materials to be processed by his store. He
began to look elsewhere for the supply of institutional clothing with
a consequent loss of work for Toowoomba women. The new sheriff (W
Townley) spelt out that the ‘essential question is really how best to
supply prisoners in penal establishments with remunerative work’.76
He reminded the Under Colonial Secretary that materials needed to
be regularly supplied ‘otherwise orders cannot be filled, and prisoners
cannot be taught to become experts unless they are regularly employed’.
If the current situation of supply in ‘fits and starts’ could not be obviated,
‘then it would be better for discipline and manufacture of products to put
prisoners to other labour even if un-remunerative’. Prison labour was not
only concerned with profit and loss accounting: in Townley’s view it was
also fundamentally concerned with maintenance of discipline and order.
Aside from the need for productive labour, Townley concluded with his
most telling observation from a recent visit to Toowoomba Gaol:
     I found all the female prisoners in a state of enforced idleness for
     want of material – the horrors attendant upon 50 reckless women
     compelled on account of faulty prison construction to live in
     association and without work may be easily imagined.77



Conclusion
Correctional histories of developments in the second half of the
nineteenth century tend to focus more on penal institutions and related
policy than on public responses to penal policy and prison reform. The
case of Toowoomba women’s gaol indicates the need for finer-grained
analysis of penal politics and public perceptions of penal policy. The
conservative, squatter-based government of Arthur Palmer decided to
move women to Toowoomba for reasons of economic expediency and
the need to organise large numbers of male prisoners and their labour
power. However, the policy was seen very differently at the regional level
where Darling Downs residents rejected the move of female prisoners to

76   Sheriff of Queensland to the Under Colonial Secretary, series 15160, item 89419, 15
     August 1891, 901–904, QSA.
77   Sheriff of Queensland to Under Colonial Secretary, series 15160, item 89420, 9 March
     1892, folio 142, QSA.

                                          154

                        Intersections in colonial and penal politics


their locality. They were not concerned with questions of prison labour
or colonial fiscal troubles, as was the government, but rather with the
perceived social problems that they believed their town would face after
the arrival of women prisoners from the city.
  The townspeople were mistaken about the relocation as an act of
political revenge, although there were good reasons for their suspicions.
Regional and colonial politics in the period were contested around
sectional issues and the need to maintain sometimes shifting local
power bases. The decision to relocate female prisoners from Brisbane to
Toowoomba was a fraught one, as a range of interested parties sought
to gain political advantage and favour. Citizens were concerned about
the potential for increased vice and crime, but the agrarian radicals also
sought to mobilise town anger against squatter interests. The government
provided little warning about the imminent relocation of the women, but
then the decision was taken quickly. The government had few channels
by which to disseminate information on policy likely to impact on the
town because on this matter, as with others, local members, the town
council, and the regional press were at loggerheads with the government.
The furore over the Prince’s visit in 1868 was indicative of the lack of
communication and the existing political divide between the government
and the townspeople. It seems also that many of Blaney’s problems
running the gaol, at least in the 1870s, arose from local and parochial
politics – criticisms from the townspeople and regional press, disputes
with local police, irregular supply of work materials for the women –
rather than from pressures internal to the gaol itself.78
  The relocation was part of an attempt to work through the problem of
prison labour, and especially to find ways of balancing productive labour
with punitive labour. Inquiries had reported on the ‘idleness’ of men and
their drain on resources at a time of acute economic depression. Removal
of the women from the metropolis opened the way to reorganise male
labour. It is possible to read other interpretations into the relocation of
urban women to Toowoomba. However, evidence of concerted attempts
to further punish these marginalised women by isolating them on the
Darling Downs is not particularly forthcoming.
  Nevertheless, a characteristic of the gendered correctional system in
Queensland had been firmly established and would be repeated into the
twentieth century. That is, in addition to any concern that authorities

78   Toowoomba Gaol was, however, roundly criticised by the 1887 Board of Inquiry, partly
     because of inadequate construction and the associated accommodation of the women,
     and also because of Blaney’s paternalistic administration of the gaol. QVP, 1887, vol 1.

                                           155

                      History Australia | Volume 9 | Number 2


may have had to control and isolate female deviance and ‘depravity’, the
fortunes of women prisoners were determined by the need to control
men.
  The scenario would later be repeated. When Toowoomba Gaol closed
at the beginning of the twentieth century, women were returned to
Brisbane to occupy what was seen at the time as a modern brick and stone
facility. Yet from the 1920s, as men were returned to the metropolis from
the deteriorating facility on St Helena and had to be accommodated, the
women were finally forced into a wooden house on the Brisbane Prison
reserve. Halloran’s cheap and ‘temporary’ accommodation for women had
finally eventuated and lasted to the mid twentieth century as further
evidence of the ongoing official neglect of women prisoners.79


About the author
Kerry Wimshurst is a lecturer in the School of Criminology and Criminal
Justice, Griffith University. His research interests are in the history and
sociology of punishment and he has published articles on reformatory
schools in the nineteenth century, and on the functions of imprisonment
in Queensland during the Great Depression. His teaching areas are in youth
justice, and crime and the media.

Correspondence to Kerry Wimshurst: K.Wimshurst@griffith.edu.au




79   Kerry Wimshurst ‘Punishment, welfare and gender ordering in Queensland,   1920–1940’,
     Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology 35 (3), 2002, 308–329.




                                          156

