      Punishment, Welfare and Gender Ordering
      in Queensland, 1920–1940
      Kerry Wimshurst
      Griffith University,Australia




              T   his study investigates the relationships between penality (or official
                  approaches to punishment) and welfare thinking that emerged in
              Queensland in the interwar years. Penality came to focus upon concerns
              about gender ordering and, in particular, those conceptions of “familied”
              masculinity and femininity which (supposedly) enhanced human wellbeing
              and social stability during a time of economic and social distress. Yet
              while state punishment selectively sanctioned and worked towards
              reinforcing particular masculine and feminine constructs, the “correc-
              tional” outcomes for various categories of male and female offenders in
              terms of their lived experiences were very different: determined not only
              by gender but also along lines of age and family arrangements. Three
              major strands of penal philosophy — the domestic, work ethic and medical
              approaches — coexisted between the wars and their overlap, seen
              perhaps more clearly in the case of women, compounded the gendered
              nature of “penality as welfare”. Attention to specific regimes in the social
              history of punishment reminds us of the need to appreciate the often
              complex interplay between systems of punishment and welfare.

      During the Great Depression in the early 1930s, the imprisonment rate for men in
      Queensland increased substantially while the incarceration of women showed
      considerable decline. These apparently contradictory trends happened also at a time
      when, over the longer 20 years period between the wars, the proportion of prisoners
      overall declined steadily relative to the State’s population. Closer inspection suggests,
      however, that different groups of men and women offenders experienced these
      trends in very different ways. This study investigates the complexity of prison trends
      and the social purposes of punishment by exploring how penal ideologies in the
      interwar years served in the quest to enhance social stability and family welfare (or
      wellbeing) during a time of economic and social distress. Penality, or state correc-
      tional policies and practices, came increasingly to sanction particular concepts of
      masculinity and femininity. The masculine and feminine models and ideals that
      received special corrective scrutiny and enforcement were those reflecting the
      (supposedly) gender-specific characteristics of “familied” men and women, models
      perceived to be the foundation of family cohesion at a time of wider public crisis.



      Address for correspondence: Kerry Wimshurst, School of Criminology and Criminal Justice,
      Griffith University, Brisbane QLD 4111, Australia.


308                             THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY
                                                           VOLUME 35 NUMBER 3 2002 PP. 308–329
                            Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



    Exploring the sociohistorical functions of penality in Australia takes us into
relatively uncharted waters since the history of punishment is an under-developed
field (for surveys, see Finnane, 1991; Garton, 1996). Research has tended to focus
on the 19th century. Even here one is hard pressed to identify major works that
explore, for example, the “birth of the prison” in the second half of the century, or
the emergence of forms of punishment and incarceration that might have been
alternative to the prison. Rather, the focus has been on convictism in the first half
of the 19th century and, in particular, the fairly recent attention given to convict
women (see Daniels, 1998). Research on the social history of 20th-century penality
remains very limited. Garton (1986) suggests that a network of “carceral” institu-
tions such as clinics for the insane and other asylums had emerged by the early
years of the 20th century, supplementing and perhaps later even replacing the
central place of the prison. However, the body of research needed to develop such
interpretations, especially across the wider arena of punishment and not just that
pertaining to imprisonment, does not exist as yet.
    In fact, the few discussions of the interwar years reflect views similar to overseas
studies. The limited work done on state penal systems here, usually in the form of
“celebratory” or “administrative” histories, portrays the interwar years essentially as
some sort of uneventful interregnum (Ramsland, 1996) or as a time of complete
stagnation in terms of “significant” developments in correctional paradigms
(Thomas & Stewart, 1978). Against the background of economic crisis and fiscal
restraints, the period 1920–40 is seen as a rather dreary intermission between the
late-19th century expansion of “new” purpose-built prisons for men and women,
and the movements for prison “reform” that came later in the 20th century.
    Yet closer inspection suggests that it is possible to identify in early 20th-century
Australia a tapestry of trends in the social aims of punishment regimes.
Commentators were certainly talking about the purposes of official punishment
during the interwar years. Finnane (1997) refers to that contemporary discourse as
a bricolage of ideas. That is, he points to an assortment of antiquated and progres-
sive ideas that might (or might not) have had an impact on what happened in
prisons and on other forms of official punishment. Pratt (1992) has explored the
multiple economic and cultural determinants of penal policy in New Zealand prior
to the Second World War. However, there remains little research to date focusing
upon particular penal regimes in Australia which compares the rhetoric of penality
with what was actually happening on the ground in terms of the lived experiences
of offenders. This empirical study of penality in Queensland contrasts the rhetoric
with the reality. It does this by situating a specific regime within the context of
recent historical and criminological theorising about modern punishment.

Themes and Theoretical Concerns:The Uses of Penality
Social Structuring
While welfare and penal systems might appear to deal with different spheres of
human experience, developments in one system at specific historical points are
often inextricably related to changes in the other. Institutions of punishment such
as reformatories and prisons for the past century have claimed that they can play a


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                         309
                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      central role in the social, physical and moral rehabilitation of their inmates. Youth
      justice is a fairly obvious example of the ongoing conflation and confusion between
      notions about welfare and punishment (see e.g., O’Connor, 1992). Garland’s
      (1985) seminal work explored the way that the development of the correctional
      ideal of rehabilitation in early 20th-century Britain, an ideal which was charac-
      terised by notions of “classification”, “treatment” and “therapy” of inmates, also
      paralleled the rise of liberal ideas normally associated with the emergence of the
      embryonic welfare state. In addition, whatever the anticipated impact of rehabilita-
      tion on individuals, modernist corrective processing with its stated objective of
      tailoring programs to individual needs, was also seen to enhance (potential)
      citizenship. Individual offenders were encouraged to feel they had not been
      banished from society, but that they still belonged to a larger collective to which
      they would return, In short, that there was life after prison.
          This study of the interwar years considers the punishment-welfare link by
      exploring a variation on the “citizenship” theme. During the interwar years, social
      commentators believed that families might be better held together and their
      wellbeing enhanced, in various ways, by officialdom’s endorsement of “familied”
      masculinity and femininity. Penality was to play an important role here along with
      other, perhaps more obvious, institutions of persuasion such as schooling, the print
      media, radio and the cinema. Thus the prison and other official punishments were
      part of a broad and complex enterprise in the 1920s and 30s where penality was one
      institution among others concerned with social structuring and gender ordering.
          Systems of punishment underscore a multiplicity of wider social ordering
      processes (see Garland, 1990; Hudson, 1996; Ignatieff, 1985), although traditional
      labour history more often portrays the role of criminal justice during the Great
      Depression years mainly as one of repression and social class control. The spectre of
      imprisonment during those years might or might not have been central to the
      exercise of class control in the interests of ruling elites. However, when the
      Comptroller-General (of prisons) urged fellow citizens to show compassion for
      vulnerable young men forced into a life of petty crime because of economic disloca-
      tion, there is no reason to assume that such sentiments were simply smokescreens for
      ruling class interests. These young men, he implied, should in normal circumstances
      be looking to a brighter future as breadwinners and heads of households: a hope now
      undermined both by a prison record and little prospect of regular employment on
      their release (Queensland Parliamentary Papers; QPP, Vol 1, 1927, p. 1150).
          Critical interpretations of the role of criminal justice in the 1930s focus upon
      the police who are usually portrayed as indifferent to the suffering of the dispos-
      sessed (e.g., Costar, 1989), or brutal in their repression of street marches and other
      forms of dissent (e.g., Scott, 1993). Yet the social role(s) of penality in the interwar
      years can be seen as much wider than the instrument of class repression. Penality
      was active across a broad front of social structuring: the punishment regime
      dispersed messages also about gender and the wellbeing of family life just as much as
      it did about “lawful” class behaviours.


310                           THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                          Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



Gender Ordering
There has been considerable work over the past couple of decades in the history and
sociology of women’s imprisonment and the ways in which incarceration might
shape particular views of womanhood (e.g., Bosworth, 1999; Dobash, Dobash, &
Gutteridge, 1986; Freedman, 1981). Similar concerns about masculinities and prison
life tend to be more recent and are usually critiques of current conditions rather
than historical investigations (see e.g., Carrabine & Longhurst, 1998; Toch, 1998).
The concept of familied masculinities and femininities in the current study is
borrowed from Daly (1989) and denotes particular types of men and women who are
not simply family members, but are seen to make (at least potentially) important
contributions to the stability of their families. Such family status might result in
differential treatment when individuals become enmeshed in the criminal justice
system. Daly found, for example, in the United States in the 1980s that sentencing
judges when considering mitigating circumstances often took into account whether
defendants could demonstrate that they performed key family responsibilities.
    The concept of “gender ordering” (Connell, 1996) designates the historically-
specific patterning of gender roles by institutions. The idea of patterning recognises
that individuals and institutions engage in ongoing processes of construction,
negotiation and the dismantling of different conceptions of masculinity and
femininity, both mainstream and marginalised. Various gender patternings, and
hence relationships within and between genders, are contested at different histori-
cal points, but the dominant modes attract (demand) greater rewards and official
endorsement than those that are more marginalised, alternative, or resistant.
During the interwar years, penality as a state institution was centrally involved in
sanctioning through rewards and punishments familied masculinities and feminini-
ties. While the term familied has been borrowed from recent criminology, the inter-
war years coincided with the beginnings of what demographic and social historians
also have called the “familist” era. This was a time, roughly between the First
World War and the early 1970s, when the nuclear family emerged as the dominant
family formation and, indeed, was championed as the only legitimate family type
(Goodnow, Burns, & Russell, 1989; Reiger, 1985).
    Further, Lake (1986) has argued that a kind of cultural and sexual power settle-
ment had been established between men and women by the early years of the 20th
century. While gender relations, Lake argues, remained in flux during the colonial
period, the new gender settlement was won through the ideological and cultural
triumph of a particular mode of domestic masculinity. This culturally dominant
form of masculinity celebrated manhood that embraced a vision of hearth and
home as the foundation both for personal fulfilment and social cohesion.
    Nevertheless, the domesticated gender settlement was shaken over and again by
successive social and economic crises, including world war and economic depres-
sion. The resulting social dislocations produced, in the eyes of officialdom,
categories of men and women who were vulnerable because their lifestyles and
circumstances placed them at risk of undermining, or never even accessing, domes-
ticity and stable family life. Penality as a state institution was enlisted to rescue and
rehabilitate numbers of these individuals, and to continue to punish others. The
impact on groups and individuals, whether male or female, older or younger,


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                         311
                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      familied or non-familied, varied considerably. In some situations individuals were
      seen as deserving special care and support because they had (apparently) fallen
      victim to economic and social distress. There were others who were viewed as quite
      undeserving of such considerations.

      Competing Paradigms of Punishment
      Overseas historians, such as Zedner (1991), building upon Foucault (1977, pp.
      293–308), have identified the evolution of a “carceral archipelago” or network of
      institutions of confinement and incarceration. This development (it is claimed)
      was facilitated by the emergence of a new medico-psychological paradigm of
      punishment in the early 20th century which encouraged and rationalised the
      relocation of some types of prisoners to other asylums and clinics in the carceral
      network. The origin(s) and nature of this carceral network are not always clear.
      Sometimes the concept seems to refer to a development whereby other types of
      institutions of confinement replaced the centrality of the prison, elsewhere it seems
      to imply a net-widening process where other institutions joined with the prison to
      engulf more and more people labelled as deviants.
          The idea of “emerging paradigms” of punishment is itself problematic. The
      tendency is to see the history of penality as a succession of ideologies where more
      progressive ideas replace earlier and more antiquated ways of “saving” offenders. For
      example, the 19th century is identified with the attempt to morally reclaim
      convicts through religious conversion and penitence, while the 20th century is
      associated with the “rise” of the rehabilitation ethos. In truth, paradigmatic shifts
      are always historically difficult to locate and clearly specify. We are always “in the
      middle” of change, and awareness that major changes might be under way remains,
      even for the principal stakeholders, often only fragmentary. Thus, there is among
      historians disagreement about the timing of major penal transformations. For
      Britain, Garland (1985) claims that the main features of modernist “welfare” penal-
      ity rose to prominence in the 20 or so years leading up to the First World War.
      Forsythe (1995), on the other hand, has argued that the “new” paradigm with its
      emphasis on treatment, therapy and rehabilitation did not establish its dominance
      so early or so quickly. Nor, he says, would it have been even clear to contemporaries
      that a potentially dominant paradigm was emerging.
          Theoretical concerns such as these in the social history of punishment have not
      been addressed thoroughly in Australia. Nevertheless, we seem to have in the case
      of Queensland in the interwar years an example of “mixed regimes” of punishment
      where a number of penal paradigms or mentalities coexisted, described below as the
      domestic, work ethic and medical models. Importantly, these paradigms of punishment
      tended to inform and feed into rather than replace each other successively (and
      some had a long history stretching well back into the 19th century and beyond).
      There were tensions between and within different correctional ideologies in the
      1920s and 30s, and residues of earlier discourses remained embedded in emerging
      conceptions of penality.
          It should not be surprising to find models of penality coexisting, overlapping
      and inter-weaving, however only empirically-grounded studies of penal practices
      (such as the following) enable us to explore the interplay and deployment of


312                          THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                         Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

                 PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



competing philosophies in specific regimes at particular historical points. Over
broader time spans, McConville (1995) has drawn attention to the way English
prisons carried much of their 19th-century administrative and cultural baggage well
into the 20th century. Other studies that have raised questions about the nature
and meanings of “overlaps” between coexisting penal philosophies include Garland
(1995) writing about continuity and change between modern and postmodern
penal regimes in the late 20th century, and Finnane (1997) on the overlap between
penitentiaries and convictism in 19th-century Australia.

M e n ,Women and Imprisonment in the Interwar Years
Between the wars the proportion of prisoners overall to the Queensland population
declined steadily. The State population increased by 35.0% but the actual number
of admissions to prisons were about the same in the late 1930s as they had been in
the late 1920s (about 1100 individuals per annum). During the depths of the
depression there was a noticeable increase in male prisoners, but after 1934–35 the
number of male receptions started to return to annual figures comparable with
those for the 1920s. On the other hand, the number of individual women admitted
to prisons in Queensland continued to drop steadily over the whole interwar
period. By the late 1930s the number of individuals received annually was about
half of what it had been in the early 1920s (from around 80–90 women per year in
1921–23, down to 40–45 in the years 1937–39). Women prisoners as a group were
somewhat older than men and they served shorter sentences. The median age for
women in Queensland prisons was 30–35 years, while for men the median age was
in the 25–30 years range. The median length of incarceration for women was less
than one month, and for men between one month and six months. The shorter
sentences for women reflected the nature of their offending: commonly, theft,
drunkenness, and prostitution-related street offences.
    Table 1 shows that in 1931–32, women and men were imprisoned mainly for
property offences. 1 The most common offence, accounting for about a third
of convictions for both, was stealing. While it is likely that property offending did
increase because of widespread economic distress (Mukherjee, 1981; Mukherjee


TABLE 1
Most Serious Offence Category of Women and Men Committed to Brisbane Prison 1931–32
(Column Percent Within Gender)

                                            Women          (%)                                  Men     (%)
                                            n = 400                                        n = 3405
Offences against the person                         6      (1.5)                                  173   (5.1)
Offences against property                        197 (49.3)                                      2507 (73.6)
Drunkenness                                        86 (21.5)                                       61   (1.8)
Other offences                                   111 (27.8)                                       663 (19.5)
Total                                            400                                             3404
Note:χ2= 411.541, df = 3, p < 0.05
     Source: Prisons Department, Annual Reports for 1931–32. QPP Vol. 1, 1932, 1933



THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                                           313
                   Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      & Fitzgerald, 1981), the figures reflect also a concern by authorities to punish
      offences such as shop-lifting in the worst years of the depression, along with the
      incapacity of those found guilty to pay fines in lieu of imprisonment. In addition
      to theft, women were imprisoned mainly for public order and street offences such
      as obscene language, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, and vagrancy. Women who
      identified as prostitutes (or were so identified by authorities) were most often
      imprisoned for drunkenness and disorderly behaviour rather than on charges relat-
      ing specifically to prostitution (e.g., soliciting). Fraud had always been associated
      more with men and was their second most common offence, accounting for about
      25.0% of male admissions. However, during the depression not only did imprison-
      ment for petty fraud increase overall, it came to contribute significantly to women’s
      imprisonment. Assault was certainly associated more with men, and the fact that
      it was one of the half-dozen most common offences for which women were impris-
      oned actually points more to the limited range of offences contributing to the
      incarceration of women.
          The imprisonment of women displayed contradictory and marginalising tenden-
      cies from the beginning of the century. A purpose-built women’s prison was opened
      in South Brisbane in 1903 adjoining the male prison that had existed there since
      the early 1880s (the whole complex was known as Boggo Road). Previous accom-
      modation for women was run according to the “associated system” which permitted
      relatively free mixing of prisoners, often in dormitories or “common sleeping
      wards”. The new institution could house around 80 women in separate cells and
      was said to be designed along the most modern penological lines (The Queenslander,
      28/11/03). According to Charles Pennefather, the superintendent of the prison
      complex, individual accommodation was essential for the proper classification of
      women prisoners. First-time offenders and younger women could be safeguarded
      from the contaminating influences of recidivists and the “old lags”. Thus the twin
      goals of modern penology, reformation and deterrence, might be achieved instead
      of simply punishing the offender.
          The new women’s prison on the eve of the First World War was hailed by
      authorities as a resounding success. Yet by 1919, precisely the same arguments
      about the necessity to classify and separate men resulted in the women being
      removed from their quarters. The largest male prison was on the island of St
      Helena where the dormitory buildings were falling apart and constituted a fire
      hazard. The Comptroller-General, Arthur Peirson, presented an ultimatum to the
      government. While many small reforms had been instituted in Queensland, thus
      making male prisons more humane than they had been in the 19th century, he
      claimed that further major reforms in terms of the classification, “scientific”
      management and the orderly return of men to civil society could never be under-
      taken satisfactorily until new buildings were provided on the mainland, preferably
      at the Boggo Road complex (Queensland State Archives; QSA, PRI/A154).
          In 1921 women were relocated to a wooden house and compound elsewhere on
      the prison reserve. Henceforth, the former women’s prison would become a division
      of the restructured men’s prison. Although numbers of women had been declining
      (a further rationale offered for their relocation), symbolic aspects of the move could
      not have been lost on either the women themselves or others. The building they


314                          THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                         Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



came to occupy was the former venereal diseases isolation ward of Brisbane
Hospital. It could house 15 women, mainly in two communal wards. Thus, by the
early 1920s, so that men might be safeguarded against the “evils” inherent in the
association system, women were actually returned to accommodation which
promoted association. At times of overcrowding, some of them had to sleep on the
verandah of their building.

Vulnerable Men and Masculinity
Young Men “At Risk”
A major theme in prison discourse in the first half of the 1920s concerned the role
of productive or “valuable labour” as an antidote to criminality. According to the
Comptroller-General’s reports in the years 1922–25, men with skilled trades were
less likely to offend in the first place, while those who did possess such skills,
including those who were taught the skills in prison, were also less likely to
reoffend because “a knowledge of a trade or some useful occupation (was) worth
more to prisoners than all the support or succour of a benevolent society upon their
release” (QPP, Vol 1, 1923, p. 1109). The possession of “industrial knowledge”
encouraged a man to see himself as “useful” to society. In truth, despite such faith
in both the preventive and rehabilitative powers of industrial knowledge, the
authorities claimed that a number of factors prevented the realisation of this ideal.
Most prison sentences were relatively short and did not allow for the development
of skills under the guidance of the warder-instructors. In addition, it was claimed
that prisoners generally were “drawn from the ranks of the idle, dirty and thriftless”
who were averse to developing any useful work skills (QPP, Vol 1, 1924, p. 1014).
Moreover, trades taught in prison such as tailoring and boot-making were increas-
ingly divorced from the realities of a mechanised world where “the old time tailor
(had) practically been crushed by the employment of female labour and the instal-
lation of machinery in clothing factories” (QPP, Vol 1, 1928, p. 970). In any case,
as the economic situation deteriorated in the late 1920s, pushing thousands out of
work, the authorities could hardly continue to claim direct links between the
development of trade skills inside prison and the gaining of a job upon release.
    Nevertheless, the supposed link between performing valuable labour while in
prison and crime prevention in the outside world had now been clearly established
as an important element in reformative discourse. In the late 1920s the concept of
valuable labour was transformed from the idea of work associated with industrial
and trade skills to that of farm labour. When he became Comptroller-General in
1926, William Gall drew attention to the increase in young male prisoners. Until
then, the relatively fewer young prisoners had been separated from “hardened
criminals” through systems of classification, but for the first time in 1925 those
20–24 years of age became the largest group in the prison population. Gall claimed
that young offenders typically engaged in petty criminality and their lives could still
be reclaimed through immersion in useful labour. The main thrust of his argument,
and it was an argument which was advanced in his annual reports for the next
seven or eight years, was that a new prison needed to be established in the metro-
politan region specifically to meet the needs of young offenders (QPP, Vol 1, 1927,


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                         315
                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      p. 1150). To be eligible for special treatment, these offenders would normally be
      non-violent first-timers. They were to be the young men, “misguided and often
      friendless”, who could be rescued.
          Other classes of prisoner (including long timers), it was claimed, might also
      benefit from exposure to farm work, but there is no doubt that as late as 1932–33
      the proposed “new” prison farm was intended essentially for the reformation of the
      young. In fact, rescuing young first-timers was, according to Gall, the most important
      function of any modern prison system. His views meshed neatly with the
      widespread belief that returning to country life and labour constituted a panacea for
      social and economic distress, especially as a solution for youth unemployment —
      commonly referred to as the “boy problem” (see e.g., Brisbane Courier 25/10/30;
      Daily Mail 29/08/31). The Comptroller-General’s report for 1931 noted a large
      increase in the proportion of prisoners under 25 years of age due, he said, to the
      prevalence of “petty thieving and evasion of railway fares”. In particular, Gall
      blamed the situation upon the influx of “unemployed males mostly from Southern
      States”. To add force to his arguments he often cited the condition of habitual
      criminals and implied that young offenders had every prospect of becoming incorri-
      gibles (QPP, Vol 1, 1933, pp. 920–926). Pratt (1997, pp. 64–69) notes that at this
      time “habituals” were largely defined (and despised) as recidivist petty criminals
      who preyed upon fellow citizens: they were thus “dangerous” in that they under-
      mined the economic security of ordinary families.
          The authorities clearly believed that there were differences between older and
      younger offenders in the early 1930s. A 20% sample (n = 483) taken from the
      Reception Registers of Brisbane Prison for the two years 1931–32 allows us to
      compare older and younger men (QSA A/18563, A/18564). Table 2 shows only
      those biographical and criminal characteristics where there were significant differ-
      ences between younger (those under 25 years of age) and older prisoners. While the
      majority of both younger (62.7%) and older (68.3%) prisoners had been born


      TABLE 2
      Characteristics Differentiating Younger (under 25 years) From Older Men Committed
      to Brisbane Prison 1931–32 (n = 483)

      Characteristic                                              F Value (df = 1, 481)
      Most serious offence                                              7.84931**
      Prison Sentence                                                   9.31752**
      Fine                                                              5.57660*
      Hard labour                                                       3.75356*
      Warrant issue                                                     6.93444**
      Previous convictions                                            21.66846***
      Means of discharge                                              10.77064***
      Occupation                                                      12.06610***
      Date of arrival in Queensland                                   33.44220***
      Note:*Significant at p < 0.05, ** Significant at p < 0.01, *** Significant at p < 0.001
           Source: Reception Registers, Brisbane Prison 1931–32, QSA A/18563, A/18564.



316                                 THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



outside Queensland, a much higher proportion of the younger prisoners were recent
arrivals. A second biographical difference is that older men were more likely to be
white collar (19.1%) or skilled workers (22.9%) than were young men (9.2% and
16.2% respectively). Older prisoners (17.9%) were twice as likely as young men
(8.5%) to be imprisoned for offences against people. Older men were also more
likely to be imprisoned even for property offences. In fact, older men were more
likely to have been imprisoned for most forms of offending — even stealing, an
offence that authorities tended to associate with the young.
    Over one third of youthful convictions were for evasion of railway fares or other
breaches of railway regulations. Offences against the railways were linked to the
fact that young, unmarried men were forced by law to remain mobile in the years
1929–33 in order to collect unemployment relief and “jumping the rattler” became
for many a dangerous way of life (e.g., Daily Mail, 9/5/31; 26/11/32). The other
significant differences between young and older prisoners noted in Table 2 (e.g.,
older men serving longer sentences and with hard labour) follow from differences
between the two groups in the seriousness and nature of offending.

Palen Creek Prison and the Rescue of Family Men
Gall’s call for a new prison farm was answered in 1934. Palen Creek State Farm was
established in a rugged (and isolated) region close to the New South Wales border.
The Comptroller-General had always rationalised the need for such a prison
in terms of meeting the needs of young people, and indeed as late as his 1933–34
annual report he still claimed that a major feature of the new prison would be the
opportunity presented to separate “juvenile offenders” from the older (QPP,
Vol 1, 1934, p. 917). Yet, it is clear that young men were certainly not a feature
of the new facility. In fact, there was a lower proportion of young men there
(17.6%) compared with Brisbane Prison (20.0%). Two main categories of offender
were sent to Palen Creek; maintenance defaulters who constituted 32.0% of men
there, and those convicted of serious property crime (fraud and serious theft).
The typical Palen Creek prisoner was Queensland born (not just Australian born),
was a maintenance defaulter, and tended to come from a skilled working class
or white collar background.2
    The evidence suggests that by the mid-1930s other groups of “at-risk” men had
superseded that earlier group which the authorities claimed were the most vulnera-
ble and deserving of rescue (that is, the young, non-violent first time offenders
convicted of minor property crimes). Maintenance defaulters are the best example
here of these “new vulnerables”, although a similar argument can be made about
many of those convicted of fraud and theft. A sample of 45 maintenance defaulters
taken from the Criminal Histories Register for Brisbane Prison for the period
1930–32 (QSA A/19881) confirms that maintenance defaulters as a group differed
in important ways from the general prison population. They tended to be older
with a median age of 36 years, only a third of them had previous convictions (aside
from previous defaulting) compared with over half the wider prison population, and
(importantly) almost half (48.9%) came from white collar and skilled worker
backgrounds compared with 37.0% of the other inmates in Brisbane Prison.


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                        317
               Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



          These “mature” men, while guilty of crimes, were often seen as deserving the
      “assistance” of the criminal justice system. They were viewed as local men who had
      fallen on hard times, men whose moral fibre had been weakened by the stresses
      of the depression years, but who when placed in a supportive and reformative
      environment might be diverted from falling further into criminality, and perhaps
      returned to their families. These sentiments are illustrated in the debates preceding
      the passing of the Maintenance and Alimony Relief Act of 1935. This Act sought to
      protect any man found guilty of defaulting on maintenance or alimony from being
      punished by imprisonment if he could satisfy a court that he was unable to pay
      through circumstances beyond his control. The Act went on to define these
      circumstances as lack of income or property, unemployment (through no fault of
      his own), and continuing ill-health. There was obvious bipartisan support for this
      measure in parliament. While legislators expressed little sympathy for “wilful
      defaulters”, they were anxious that “decent men” should not be penalised through
      imprisonment “as many of them were thought to be”. There was general agreement
      that in times past strong measures had been needed to ensure that familied men
      met their obligations — however conditions had deteriorated to the present where
      the spectre of unemployment created discontent and upheaval in family life.
      Moreover, speakers even fixed upon the notion of the “malevolent” spouse or
      “revengeful wives”. “There is a class of vindictive woman who is really not so much
      concerned about securing maintenance for herself as about wreaking vengeance
      upon her unfortunate victim — the husband” (Debates of the Legislative Assembly,
      Vol clxvii 1935, p. 1358).
          The point is not to argue here that maintenance defaulters who were commit-
      ted to Palen Creek were somehow “innocents” (nor, on the other hand, to argue
      that they deserved incarceration). Rather, it is obvious that by the mid-1930s these
      types of men were portrayed not so much as criminals but as men broken by
      circumstances. The prison farm was a site for the renewal of damaged masculinity,
      an environment in which men, and especially familied men, could be rehabilitated
      back into decent and responsible ways. The Courier-Mail noted in 1934 in relation
      to prison farms that, “It had been found that in these camps, which [housed] profes-
      sional men, clerks and others, nerve-wracked men had been built into strong,
      healthy specimens as a result of their work there, and practically all had ‘made
      good’.” (QSA A/19963) Or again, “The prison farm takes them out of the gaol
      environment, and gives them the opportunity of working out their own regenera-
      tion in congenial, happy surroundings, before resuming their place in the outside
      world as citizens” (Sunday Mail, 23/2/36).
          Much emphasis was placed on the fact that the 30 or so men confined at Palen
      Creek at any one time were supervised basically by themselves, through their own
      trustworthiness — they were honour bound not to attempt escape. Each man
      occupied a separate small hut which he was expected to keep “scrupulously clean”.
      Indeed, the whole thrust of the farm was to develop a sense of pioneering spirit in
      these men (“fortitude in adversity”) and a sense of being productive agents.
      Accounts of the farm in the late 1930s dwelt upon the clearing of virgin scrub,
      planting of crops, the purchase of stud stock and the rearing of prize show animals,
      and fighting bush fires shoulder-to-shoulder with local inhabitants. In one report,


318                          THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                         Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



the “little colony” of prisoners was referred to as an “exclusive club” where the
relationship between the officer-in-charge and the prisoners resembled “a farmer
moving among trusted employees” (Truth, 10/5/36).
    Thus the state farm in Queensland — along with its apparent rehabilitative
powers — almost immediately became the preserve of mature men who hopefully
with the right treatment could be rescued and reintegrated back into their family
responsibilities. Indeed, a striking feature of the annual reports of the Prisons
Department in the years leading up to the Second World War is that any references
to young people and their problems virtually disappeared from the prison discourse.
One of the few innovations in penality in the interwar years had, in essence, sacri-
ficed the welfare of young vulnerable men to the interests of older familied men
(which was, in itself, an intriguing twist on the notion of patriarchy).

Disappearing Women Criminals
Young Women “At Risk”
Much disquiet was expressed between the wars about conditions for young women
and the potential for them developing criminal lifestyles. The worry in the 1920s
was that the lives of families and young people had been so disrupted by the war
and its aftermath that society was now pervaded by a general air of restlessness.
Allen (1990, p. 130–40) has also noted the ongoing tensions between women and
men and the upheaval in gender relations which accompanied the war. Young
women, it was said, drifted into common lodging houses where they frequently
came under the influence of older women, the latter themselves “sunk low, not
infrequently as a result of vice” (e.g., Daily Mail, 27/3/21). There is here the irony
that while authorities feared the contaminating influence of older women in the
outside world, they apparently were prepared to accept the risks of associating
prisoners of all ages and backgrounds in the women’s prison.
    Later in the 1930s, the authorities feared that the demoralising impact of
poverty and unemployment would destroy the physical and moral health of the
young. The Commissioner for Public Health warned that venereal disease must
surely increase, not only because for men “idleness was the mother of lechery”, but
it was also said that unemployed and destitute women were replacing the services of
“professional” prostitutes. The outcome, according to health authorities, would be
scars on civilisation that would “remain long after the temporary depression had
passed” (QPP, vol. 1, 1932, p. 650). There were concerns that domestic servants
and office workers, fearing identification and loss of employment, might be reluc-
tant to seek treatment.
    The anxieties about young women and their welfare were always complicated
by the cross currents of both gender and generational concerns. Young women
supposedly required more protection but at the same time there was the sense that
they were always potentially more “vicious” than young men, vicious in the sense
that common wisdom had it that a woman once gone “bad” was always harder to
rehabilitate (Daily Mail, 26/4/30; Truth, 3/8/30). The well-publicised case of Rose
Harrison illustrates the ambivalent views. Rose (22 years) was convicted in 1930,
along with her husband, of a robbery in which a nightwatchman was injured, and


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                         319
                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      she was sent to prison. Initially, the reports of her “sad plight” portrayed her as a
      victim of the times: a young woman from a country town whose mother had
      attempted to dissuade her daughter from marrying a man on government relief, she
      was a young person driven by desperation and poverty to plan a robbery (“cruel
      fate” had struck Rose down). When, however, she was almost immediately released
      on order of the government and along with her mother boarded ship for Britain,
      public opinion and the press were outraged. Not only did Rose appear to be
      “getting away” with a major crime, it seems that she was not prepared to express
      any remorse or contrition, and was able (claimed the Truth, 26/10/30) to calmly
      walk away from her husband who was left to languish in the men’s prison (and she
      was an expectant mother).
          Table 3 and Table 4 compare a sample of younger women under 25 years of age
      (n = 34) with older women (n = 147) who were committed to Brisbane women’s
      prison (QSA PRI 1/18, A/19868). There was a significant relationship (p < 0.05)
      between age and occupation, and between age and types of offending. A large
      proportion of younger women were domestic servants, while middle-aged and older
      women were more commonly identified as prostitutes. Younger women were more
      commonly convicted for stealing, while those identified as “known” or “reputed”
      prostitutes were admitted for drunkenness and public order offences. Younger
      women, because their offences were the comparatively more serious property
      offences, were more likely than older offenders to have a sentence longer than a
      month and to have a larger fine imposed as an alternative to prison.
          Thus there were two groups of women prisoners during the interwar years. First,
      there were younger women under 25 years of age working as domestic servants who
      were imprisoned for stealing. These younger women were also less likely to be
      familied. Table 3 indicates that incarcerated women whose occupations were
      identified as “domestic duties” (that is, those most likely to be familied) tended to
      fall into the 25–34 years age group. Second, clearly there was a group of older
      prisoners, mostly over 35 years of age, often designated prostitutes, who were
      imprisoned repeatedly for drunkenness and other street offences


      TABLE 3
      Occupation by Age Group: Women Committed to Brisbane Prison 1922–23, 1936–37 (n = 147)
      (Column Percent Within Age Group)

                            15–24 (%)            25–34 (%)            35–44 (%)           45 years (%)
                             years                years                years              and over           Total
      Skilled worker           3 (8.8%)              1 (2.7%)              2 (5.3%)              5 (13.2)     11
      Domestic servant        14 (41.2)              9 (24.3)            12 (31.6)               7 (18.4)     42
      Home duties              8 (23.5)            18 (48.6)               4 (10.5)            11 (28.9)      41
      Prostitute               7 (20.6)              9 (24.3)            18 (47.4)             11 (28.9)      45
      Other*                   2 (5.9)               0 (0)                 2 (5.3)               4 (10.5)       8
      Total                   34                   37                    38                    38            147
      Note:*Barworker, laundress, clerk, nurse, unemployed χ2 = 25.730, df = 12 , p < 0.05
           Source: Reception Registers, Brisbane Prison. QSA PRI 1/18, A/19868



320                                THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                               Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

                  PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



TABLE 4
Comparison of Specific Offences of Younger (Under 25 Years) and Older Women Committed to
Brisbane Prison 1922–23, 1936–37 (Column Percent Within Age Group)

                                     Young women            (%)                   Women 25 years       (%)
                                           n = 34                                      and older
                                                                                         n = 113
Manslaughter/murder                                  5 (14.7%)                                     1   (0.9)
Stealing                                            12 (35.3)                                     18 (15.9)
Break and enter                                      3      (8.8)                                  1   (0.9)
Fraud                                                3      (8.8)                                  1   (0.9)
Robbery                                              1      (2.9)                                  4   (3.5)
Vagrancy                                             1      (2.9)                                  5   (4.4)
Loitering                                            2      (5.9)                                  8   (7.1)
Assault                                              0      (0)                                    5   (4.4)
Drunkenness                                          2      (5.9)                                 49 (43.4)
Obscene lang./disorderly conduct                     1      (2.9)                                 10   (8.8)
Other offences                                       4 (11.8)                                     11   (9.7)
Note: χ2 = 42.776, df = 10, p < 0.05
     Source: Reception Registers, Brisbane Prison. QSA PRI 1/18, A/19868


Saving Familied Women
Nevertheless, the numbers of women actually imprisoned continued to decline in
the interwar period. The Comptroller-General reasoned that magistrates endeav-
oured to impose fines upon married women (which might be paid) in preference to
prison (QPP, Vol. 1, 1933, p. 926). Other commentators made similar observations:
“Some people say it is because there is less crime among women here, but others
maintain that it is due to the extra leniency of Queensland courts” (Sunday Mail,
23/5/37). The burden of holding families together (or, at least this expectation) fell
especially on women (Macintyre, 1986, p. 279), and it is likely that magistrates
were increasingly mindful of this when sentencing. The familied woman with
dependent children tempted into larceny through desperation was often portrayed
as the typical shop-lifter of the period. Women with obvious family responsibilities
were deserving of some leniency, as in the example of Mrs D whose case was
recounted by a police prosecutor:
           Mrs D — wife of a relief worker with a large family. Detected in first attempt to steal
           groceries from a cash and carry store. Case investigated and found to be genuinely
           one prompted by need. Convicted and discharged. No likelihood of further offence
           (Sunday Mail, 19/7/36).
On the other hand, stealing that appeared to be systematic and “not done on
impulse” attracted a prison term and signs of defiance or lack of contrition (despite
a guilty plea) would also likely result in prison. Ella Norris (44 years) was described
as an “almost destitute” housewife, but one who had planned carefully her criminal
activities. She stated in court that she intended to continue stealing clothing as, in


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                                          321
                    Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      her view, “she was only doing what all the unemployed were doing”. She received
      two weeks imprisonment, the magistrate stating that such thefts were becoming too
      frequent and that store managers were too often “hoodwinked by stories of poverty”
      (Daily Mail, 16/1/32). Thus, thieves who were “good” women could apparently be
      distinguished from those who were not. Good women might be driven by despera-
      tion to steal for the sake of their families, but they also displayed contrition when
      apprehended and processed. They did not display premeditation, criminal ingenuity
      and defiance. In short, there are indications that familied women were being
      increasingly processed in judicially different ways and diverted away from the prison.

      Disowning Marginalised Women
      Despite the prevalence of stealing, almost half the women in Brisbane Prison were
      committed for drunkenness, loitering, vagrancy and other street offences. A regular
      feature of the Comptroller-General’s reports was his criticism of the practice of
      committing women of the “vagrant and drunkard class” constantly to very short
      prison sentences (he pointed to one case with 152 recorded convictions). As an
      alternative, he called for a “State Inebriate Home” where women could be treated
      in a “scientific manner”. However, this experiment was very short lived and the
      Inebriate Institution, which had been established in the 1890s, was seen as an utter
      failure as far as women were concerned. In the interwar years, the Inebriate
      Institution, which admitted around 50 inmates per year, was part of the Benevolent
      Asylum which itself housed about 1000 men and 150 women. George Jackson,
      chief attendant of the institution, wrote in 1916 that women admitted were so
      morally inferior that he had:
             … very grave doubts whether anything could be done for such cases. They were
             compelled to come here against their wills and apparently have no desire to reform.
             These wretched people were sent here off and on for two years when the magistrates
             apparently began to realise that it was useless to continue to send them and
             since then the female portion of the institution has practically become a dead-letter
             (QSA A/31745).
      Women were not welcome at the Inebriate Institution because they were viewed as
      trouble-makers who disrupted the good work of the institution, especially the care
      that was being provided for returned servicemen. By the late 1920s, relatively few
      women were admitted and these few were said to be a “better class” of inebriate,
      more like the men who were seen as failed “battlers” seeking escape through
      alcohol. The larger Benevolent Asylum also complained of the rowdiness of women
      inmates. As early as 1912, a detention ward had been constructed in the female
      section of the asylum and the annual reports to parliament referred to the deten-
      tion ward often being full. Sometimes those admitted to this institution, which
      existed ostensibly to shelter older and indigent persons, were put in detention
      immediately on arrival, and this was said to happen because the “mental hospitals
      were crowded”.
          It appears that between the wars, numbers of women (in particular), were
      passed around between institutions that really did not want them. The prisons did
      not want the inebriates because officialdom rightly saw alcoholism as a health
      problem; the Inebriates Institution certainly did not want the troublemakers; and


322                           THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                          Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



the mental hospitals did not want anyone who was not clearly “insane”, especially
if such patients were violent or were suspected of “malingering” (i.e., convicted
offenders attempting to avoid prison life). It was not so much the case of an
expanding carceral network replacing the prison, rather categories of marginalised
individuals got moved around among the institutions that already existed. There
were ongoing complaints in the early 1930s that the Benevolent Asylum was forced
to accommodate the types of inmates not wanted by either the insane asylum or
the general hospital, nor by the prison for that matter. These were a “class of older
women who (were) thoroughly bad and loved a row”. The medical superintendent
wrote of the women in the Benevolent Asylum in 1932:
       The Female Division is much the same as usual and will remain so, I suppose, until
       some other means are devised for dealing with epileptics, mental defectives, outlaws
       from the State Children Department, and others on the border line of insanity. The
       Male side gives no trouble in this respect; it is all on the other side (QPP, Vol. 1,
       1933, p. 903).


Rhetoric and Realities of Punishment Regimes
The situation for women prisoners (in particular) reflects three philosophical
approaches to penality that coexisted in the interwar years. Two models — the
domestic and the work ethic paradigms — had rather long histories but they
remained very important strands of penal thinking between the wars. The domesti-
cating view of punishment grew out of the 19th-century movement for women’s
prison reform and continued to incorporate a strong leaning toward the spiritual
and moral regeneration of the prisoner. The women’s prison was considered a
“small community” where the matron and warders encouraged inmates to become
more complete women, especially in mastering basic survival skills such as cooking
and sewing, since many women upon entry were said to have “no idea” about such
tasks. Two feature newspaper articles in 1937 focused upon the sense of quiet and
orderly domestication which characterised the women’s prison: the warders who
called inmates by their first names, the smell of cooking wafting across the “sun
bathed veranda”, the clothes-horse of ironing being aired (Telegraph, 12/2/37;
Sunday Mail, 23/5/37). This was a tranquillity, however, that could always be
disrupted by one “disagreeable prisoner” who refused to adhere to the rules of
domestic regulation.
    Instilling the work ethic and a sense of self-respect and self-reliance that suppos-
edly followed from involvement in the world of work was the second main
approach to penality. This orientation also strongly informed approaches to male
rehabilitation and penality. The declining number of women prisoners over the
period was seen as proof not only that Queensland was more law-abiding than
other states but also that the drive to instil habits of work was successful.
Applications for remission of sentence, increases in gratuities paid for prison
labour, promotion through classifications within the institution were all depen-
dent upon the prisoner’s “faithful and diligent performance” of the work allocated
to him/her. The skills that were imparted were fairly useless in terms of gainful
employment since everyone acknowledged that mechanised industry had moved


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                          323
                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      well beyond the sort of “hand craft” approach utilised in prisons, but it was the
      development of orderly habits that were considered essential. The response from
      the Queensland government to a League of Nations survey in 1937 about prison
      conditions emphasised moral reformation and the inculcation of orderly work
      habits as the twin pillars of penal policy. There was, in fact, no official mention of
      any other forms of treatment, therapy or rehabilitative efforts on behalf of women
      or men (QSA A/20032).
          The third model, the medical paradigm of penality, emerged in the early 20th
      century as an integral part of mounting concern about the absence of alternatives
      to the prison. The demand for some new type of institution might with hindsight
      be interpreted as a call to add another element to an expanding carceral network.
      Indeed, the new institution as it was envisaged by contemporaries, certainly sounds
      like some all-embracing mechanism for detention and confinement, intended for
      sweeping the streets clean of all manner of deviants. But, many commentators were
      expressing their genuine concerns about the welfare of repeat offenders for whom
      there seemed to be no humane alternative to the prison or insane asylum, neither
      of which, it was claimed, could deter or rehabilitate typical recidivists, particularly
      marginalised women.
          The medico-therapeutic model reflected the themes and concerns of the wider
      eugenics movement in the interwar years. Eugenicists were mainly professionals and
      intellectuals who were concerned to promote (or rescue) the racial health of the
      nation across a range of public policy areas: education, medicine, public health and
      hygiene, and responses to crime and criminality. Historians (Garton, 1994; Jones,
      1999; Watts, 1994) have pointed to the complexity of the eugenics movement.
      Eugenics advocated what at times appears a seemingly contradictory range of beliefs
      and practices, spanning progressive and even radical ideas, through to those that
      were reactionary, right-wing, and racist. Some eugenicists believed that human
      health and fitness might be improved through environmental manipulation, others
      believed that heredity (as the key determinant of behaviour) might only be influ-
      enced through more drastic interventions into the lives of “deviant” individuals and
      groups. In terms of penality and the prison regime, these positions tended to trans-
      late into, in the first instance, a faith in psychological assessment and therapy.
      Criminality was the product of stressful and disadvantaged social and/or psychologi-
      cal environments and thus, with appropriate treatment and care, some criminals
      might be “cured”. In the second instance, if behaviour was largely determined
      through nature and genetic inheritance, then isolation and incapacitation of incorri-
      gible populations (including, if thought necessary, sterilisation) was said to be proba-
      bly the most effective and realistic response. These two medical responses, at times
      overlapping and inter-weaving, were reflected in the public discourse in the interwar
      years about the purposes of correctional punishment in Queensland.
          There is little indication in the official reports of the Prisons Department that a
      medico-psychological paradigm was emerging in the interwar years, but much was
      reported in the newspapers concerning newer elements in the penal discourse.
      A range of alternatives to “normal” prisons were touched on: suggestions included a
      prison farm for women shoplifters. However, the medical paradigm was really
      manifested in the idea of what the Comptroller-General J.F. Whitney usually called


324                           THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                          Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

              PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



the “halfway house” (or “psychological reformatory”), an institution that stood
midway between the prison and the hospital, where punishment would take second
place to observation, treatment, correction and rehabilitation (Whitney, quoted
Sunday Mail, 21/6/36). The new institution was seen more as a hospital than a
prison, one with walls to be sure, but a place where self-renewal would be encour-
aged and industrious work habits inculcated. According to this view, criminality
was a sickness, as an experienced lady visitor to the women’s prison observed:
       All crime, in my opinion, is a disease, and eventually, I hope, people who do not
       obey the law will be treated as sick people and receive medical attention.
       Experienced medical psychologists should be engaged and the prisoners should be
       psycho-analysed. Such a humane system would, I believe, reduce crime and save
       many persons from insane asylums (Courier-Mail, 19/6/36).
Other “medical” proponents adopted a more extreme eugenics stance. To them
“the prostitute and criminal classes” were the products of mental defect and
degeneracy. Comparing the criminal to the leper, they claimed that a healthy state
in its own defence must incarcerate offenders until such time as inmates could
demonstrate that they had been cured or no longer presented a threat to civilised
society. “Normal” prison punishment held no deterrent value for these “subnor-
mal” and “brutish” human beings, and in fact it was claimed that there was proba-
bly little hope for reforming most of them. According to this view, the new
halfway institution must function somewhere between the prison and a high
security insane asylum. A “Leading Brisbane Specialist” was quoted on the need
for specialist clinics:
       The establishment of a clinic would make it possible to examine habitual criminals
       and those found to be mentally defective could be sent to a special institution where
       they could work for the State and cease to overcrowd the gaols and waste the time
       of the law courts. Most importantly of all, one of the causes of racial decay —
       the breeding of mental defectives — could be eliminated to a great extent by the
       sterilisation of mental defectives and habitual criminals found in the same class
       (The Queenslander, 21/5/36).
Ultimately, the outcome of these cross currents and diverse points of view about
the purposes of penality was that there was little change in the lives of prisoners.
Again, the case of women incarcerated in Brisbane Prison is instructive. In the
mid-1930s, former prisoners described the place as “antediluvian”. While they
agreed that the matron and warders were “kindly”, the institution was portrayed
as a small, isolated colony of women hidden away in the inner suburbs, forgotten
by all except those confined there. Work was supposedly the main reformative
instrument, but inmates complained that they were confined to the dormitory
or cells for 17 out of the 24 hours in the day. The sense of being neglected by
officials beyond the prison walls was described by one woman as typifying the “mild
malignancy” of the Queensland government. She claimed that:
       An ideal gaol is one that the world remembers, and in which the prisoner forgets.
       But this women’s gaol is one that the community has forgotten. Only its inmates will
       remember it, and the lessons learnt within its dilapidated walls (Truth, 4/8/35).


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                          325
                Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



      The Home Secretary and the Comptroller-General denied the allegations of
      neglect, although they were less than enthusiastic in their defence of the women’s
      prison. Women continued to inhabit the “dilapidated” structures until 1951 when
      they were moved to the former venereal diseases lock hospital located only a few
      hundred metres from the wooden structure they had inhabited since 1921. To
      outsiders, such as the International Prison Commission, the system in Queensland
      in the interwar years was portrayed as conforming generally with the best interna-
      tional standards. Yet in 1929, the Superintendent of Brisbane Prison wrote in his
      annual report to the Comptroller-General (comments that never found their way
      into the Department’s annual report tabled in parliament for that year):
             I desire to mention that the staff at the female prison is very small and will not admit
             of an officer remaining on duty between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6.30 a.m. I have,
             however, arranged for the warder coming off duty at 10 p.m. to sleep in the prison in
             a room adjoining the cells so that if anything is required during the night, this officer
             can give the alarm to the Matron who resides just outside the prison. I am of the
             opinion that there should be an officer on duty all night, more particularly to look
             out that the place does not catch fire, which would be a very serious matter, as it
             might be difficult to get the prisoners out in time (QSA A/19588).


      Conclusion
      Prisons and the wider system of penality were enlisted in the interwar years in
      Queensland to support familied concepts of masculinity and femininity. The stabil-
      ity of family life was considered essential for riding out the distress of the depres-
      sion years. It might, of course, be argued that the relationship worked more the
      other way: that familied concepts were enlisted to manage/organise the punish-
      ment regime (and the role of the domestic model is usually interpreted in this
      way). No doubt there was a two-way process here, but there is certainly enough
      evidence to confirm that officialdom looked intentionally to the punishment
      regime to underscore respectable family and gender arrangements. In turn, this
      endeavour meant that male and female offenders often experienced very different
      punitive outcomes from interwar penality. Familied men, particularly first-time
      property offenders and maintenance defaulters, were given the opportunity to
      participate in the rehabilitative ethos of the state prison farm. The women’s prison
      population declined, apparently because of an increasing array of judicial diversion-
      ary practices. Diversion again was intended especially to rescue familied and
      “respectable” female property offenders.
          The interests of other offenders were not so well-served. Young men disappeared
      from the pre-war prison discourse once the authorities decided to focus their refor-
      mative efforts on family men. And, if anything, penal conditions for marginalised
      women deteriorated over the first half of the century. Their prison became a place
      where those not wanted by other institutions were dumped, and when not confined
      to the prison, then they were shunted between other institutions. Early on, this was
      perhaps most obvious in the case of inebriates, but by the 1930s there were calls for a
      new type of “psychological reformatory” which was intermediate between the prison
      and the hospital, aimed at the “treatment” of a range of recidivists. While interest in


326                            THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                           Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

                PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



such a scheme (which did not eventuate) can be read as part of some relentless drive
to expand a grand system of penality, there is no doubt that many contemporaries
between the wars saw this alternative to the prison as a humane step. Even the
eugenicists believed that inflicting imprisonment upon the feeble minded, alcoholic
or morally degenerate was, in fact, itself immoral as well as pointless.
     A medical paradigm emerged, portraying criminality as pathology where offend-
ing was a sign of sickness requiring close observation and study, followed by “scien-
tific” treatment. At the same time, other penal paradigms, some with long histories,
very decidedly retained their appeal, coexisting with and often feeding into
“modern” debates about penality. In truth, however, contemporary debates about
appropriate models of punishment, rehabilitation and treatment appear to have had
little impact on the realities of life for prisoners between the wars.
     While discourse(s) about punishment in any period can be explored from
a “history of ideas” perspective, it is likely that empirical research on specific penal
regimes will recast some important questions about penality, or reshape the answers
to standard questions. For example, wider social arrangements at any historical
point certainly shape penal mentalities but what happens in context-specific ways
in the arenas of punishment (prisons and otherwise) underpin and reinforce those
wider social arrangements, aspirations and anxieties. The outcomes of the
society/penality nexus are often complex, confused and contradictory as illustrated
by the Queensland case. This is partly because of the competing models or strands
of penality which might coexist at any time. Indeed, below the level of rhetoric
these compounding ideologies seem to create inertia in day-to-day penal practices.
It is also partly because of the drive by penal regimes to both incapacitate and
isolate those deemed undesirable or dangerous, while also endeavouring to enhance
the wellbeing of others. What these tensions and cross-currents in penal mentali-
ties and practices actually mean for the lived experiences of offenders, as well as the
experiences of the correctional workers charged with their supervision and control,
can only be explored more fully through empirical investigation of specific punish-
ment regimes in their historical settings.

Acknowledge m e n t s
Research assistance was provided by Carol Ronken and Jonathan Richards. Funding
was provided by a Small ARC grant. The Queensland Department of Corrective
Services gave permission for access to data on prisoners in the late 1930s. I thank
two anonymous reviewers for their critique and constructive comments.

Endnotes
1   Male and female prisoners in Brisbane Prison were mainly Anglo-Australian. Seventy per
    cent of men were Australian born, 20.0% in the UK and Ireland, and 10.0% in other
    countries, mainly European and especially Germany. For women, the corresponding figures
    were respectively: 63.0%, 33.0%, and 4.0% foreign-born. Foreign-born men and women in
    our sample display lower rates of property offences and drunkenness than Anglo-Australians,
    offences against the person were roughly similar, but foreigners were imprisoned more for a
    range of minor (e.g., obscene language) or regulatory offences (e.g., infringements of railway
    bylaws). Indigenous Australians were committed to Queensland prisons, and appear to have


THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                                327
                  Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

      KERRY WIMSHURST



          constituted between 1.5 to 2.5% of the annual prison population in the interwar years. But, in
          the main, Aboriginal “incorrigibles” were, by the late 1920s, increasingly deported to the
          Palm Island reserve, described by Finnane & McGuire (2001, p. 292) as “a peculiar mix of
          prison, protectorate and concentration camp”. Prison admission registers do not identify race
          specifically, unless one assumes that the complexion category “dark complexion” was a
          euphemism for Aboriginal or Islander. In short, any meaningful comments upon foreign-born
          or Indigenous prisoners requires either a larger sample or different source material than those
          used for this study.
      2   Prison farms or “open prisons” had been established elsewhere in Australia for more than
          a decade. New South Wales had certainly established them by 1920 (see, Lynn & Armstrong,
          1996, p. 129; Ramsland, 1996, pp. 209–229). In fact, J.F. Whitney, the new Comptroller-
          General at the time Palen Creek was established, had come from a senior position in NSW,
          and thus would have been very familiar with similar establishments there. Nevertheless, local
          print media and the reports of the Prisons Department championed the concept of Palen
          Creek as essentially a home-grown Queensland contribution to penological theory and
          practice. Interestingly, NSW established very early separate farms for younger and older
          prisoners, unlike Queensland which quickly moved away from concern specifically for the
          needs of young prisoners.


      Refe rences
      Allen, J. (1990). Sex and secrets: Crimes involving Australian women since 1880. Melbourne: Oxford
          University Press.
      Bosworth, M. (1999). Engendering resistance: Agency and power in women’s prisons. Aldershot:
          Ashgate
      Carrabine, E., & Longhurst, B. (1998). Gender and prison organisation: Some comments
          on masculinities and prison management. Howard Journal, 37(2), 161–176.
      Connell, R.W. (1996). New directions in gender theory: Masculinity research, and gender politics.
          Ethnos, 6(4), 157–176.
      Costar, B. (1989). Controlling the victims: The authorities and the unemployed in Queensland
          in the Great Depression. Labour History, 56, 1–14.
      Daly, K. (1989). Rethinking judicial paternalism: Gender, work-family relations, and sentencing.
          Gender and Society, 3(1), 9–36.
      Daniels, K. (1998). Convict women. St. Leonards, Vic: Allen & Unwin.
      Dobash, R.P., Dobash, R.E., & Gutteridge, S. (1986). The imprisonment of women. Oxford:
          Basil Blackwell.
      Finnane, M. (1997). Punishment in Australian society. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
      Finnane, M. (1991). After the convicts: Towards a history of imprisonment in Australia.
          Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology, 24(2), 105–118.
      Finnane, M., & McGuire, J. (2001) The uses of punishment and exile: Aborigines in colonial
          Australia. Punishment and Society, 3(2), 279–298.
      Forsythe, W.J. (1995). The Garland thesis and the origins of modern English prison discipline:
          1835–1939. Howard Journal, 34(3), 259–273.
      Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. New York: Pantheon Books.
      Freedman, E. (1981). Their sisters’ keepers: Women’s prison reform in America 1830–1930.
          Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
      Garland, D. (1985). Punishment and welfare: A history of penal strategies. Aldershot, UK: Gower.
      Garland, D. (1990). Punishment and modern society: A study in social theory. Oxford: Clarendon.
      Garland, D. (1995). Penal modernism and postmodernism. In T.G. Blomberg & S. Cohen (Eds.),
          Punishment and control: Essays in honor of Sheldon L. Messinger (pp. 181–210). New York:
          Aldine De Gruyter.



328                             THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY

                            Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

                 PUNISHMENT,WELFARE AND GENDER ORDERING IN QUEENSLAND, 1920–1940



Garton, S. (1996). The convict taint: Australia and New Zealand. In C. Emsley & L. Knafla
    (Eds.), Crime history and histories of crime: Studies in the historiography of crime and criminal justice
    in modern history (pp. 271–290). Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
Garton, S. (1994). Sound minds and healthy bodies: Re-considering eugenics in Australia,
    1914–1940. Australian Historical Studies, 26(103), 163–181.
Garton, S. (1986). The rise of the therapeutic state: Psychiatry and the system of criminal juris-
    diction in New South Wales, 1890–1940. Australian Journal of Politics and History, 32(3),
    378–388.
Goodnow, J., Burns, A., & Russell, G. (1989). Australian families: Pictures and interpretations.
    In K. Hancock (Ed.), Australian Society (pp. 23–43). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hudson, B. (1996). Understanding justice: An introduction to ideas, perspectives and controversies
    in modern penal theory. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Ignatieff, M. (1985). State, civil society and total institutions: A critique of recent social histories
    of punishment. In S. Cohen & A. Scull (Eds.), Social control and the state: Historical and
    comparative essays (pp. 75–105). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Jones, R.L. (1999). The master potter and the rejected pots: Eugenic legislation in Victoria,
    1918–1939. Australian Historical Studies, 31(113), 319–342.
Lake, M. (1986). The politics of respectability: Identifying the masculinist context. Historical
    Studies, 22(86), 116–131.
Lynn, P., & Armstrong, G. (1996). From Pentonville to Pentridge: A history of prisons in Victoria.
    Melbourne: State Library of Victoria.
Macintyre, S. (1986). The Oxford history of Australia (Volume 4, 1901–41). Melbourne: Oxford
    University Press.
McConville, S. (1995). The Victorian Prison: England, 1865–1965. In N. Morris & D. Rothman
    (Eds.), The Oxford history of the prison: The practice of punishment in western society
    (pp. 131–167). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mukherjee, S.K. (1981). Crime trends in 20th-century Australia. Sydney: Australian Institute
    of Criminology, George Allen & Unwin.
Mukherjee, S.K., & Fitzgerald, R.W. (1981). The myth of rising female crime. In S.K Mukherjee
    & J. Scutt (Eds.), Women and crime (pp. 127–166). Sydney: Australian Institute of Crim-
    inology, George Allen & Unwin.
O’Connor, I. (1992). Youth, crime and justice in Queensland. Brisbane: Criminal Justice Commission.
Pratt, J. (1992). Punishment in a perfect society: The New Zealand penal system, 1840–1939.
    Wellington: Victoria University Press.
Pratt, J. (1997). Governing the dangerous: Dangerousness, law and social change. Sydney: Federation Press
Ramsland, J. (1996). With just and relentless discipline: A social history of corrective services in New
    South Wales. Kenthurst, NSW: Kangaroo Press.
Reiger, K. (1985). The disenchantment of the home: Modernizing the Australian family, 1880–1940.
    Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Scott, J. (1993). A place in normal society: Unemployed protest in Queensland in the 1930s.
    Labour History, 65, 136–149.
Thomas, J., & Stewart, A. (1978). Imprisonment in Western Australia: Evolution, theory and practice.
    Perth: University of Western Australia Press.
Toch, H. (1998). Hypermasculinity and prison violence. In L. Bowker (Ed.), Masculinities and
    violence (pp. 168–178). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Watts, R. (1994). Beyond nature and nurture: Eugenics in 20th century Australian history.
    Australian Journal of Politics and History, 40(3), 318–334.
Zedner, L. (1991). Women, crime and custody in Victorian England. Oxford: Clarendon.


                                                        ■   ■■

THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF CRIMINOLOGY                                                           329
                    Downloaded from anj.sagepub.com at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 4, 2016

